"Pray not for God's word, but for His silence.

Pray not for God's grace, but for His apathy.

Pray not for God's blessing, but for His abandon.

Above all, fear. Fear His contempt. Fear His disgust. Fear His wrath.

Pray, plead, and beg, with every fiber of your soul, that God's wrath does not find you."

- Book of Corrax, chapter 16



E1M1: Fight Like Hell?

Red. Bright flashing red. A siren loudly blared as the strobing light pierced the darkness.

A glowing crimson mark burned overhead. A flaming sword, crowned by Four Sigils of Ascension, striking down the fires of Hell.

?

Hell.

Hell.

He remembered the violence, the carnage, the chaos. The Black Mountains, the Blood Temple, the world crumbling at his feet and the very sky crashing down on him, trapping him in a dark stone prison.

But that was over.

The Marine was awake, and he was very much alive. His heart beat strong and steady in his chest, his breaths deep and invigorating. He lay bound on his back by thick metal chains, the top of his sarcophagus lifted and his slumber at long last broken.

A new sound drew the Marine’s attention. A harsh guttural groaning coming from his right side, accompanied by the unmistakable smell of putrefied flesh. Things he knew all too well. He turned his head to find a zombified human standing only a few meters away. Its flesh hung off its bones in thick, sloughy folds, a deep gaping hole in its skull where the eyes should have been. The tattered white clothes it wore identified it as a former scientist, not a grave threat but still capable of injuring the chained Marine. With a fresh surge of determination, the Marine tore his right arm free of its restraints and smashed it into the creature’s face, feeling blood roar in his ears as he grabbed the zombie’s head and crushed it against the edge of the coffin.

The Marine tore his remaining arm free as well only to hear the same grotesque groaning continue. There were another three zombies in the room, all facing him and shambling in his direction. In a fraction of a second he leapt at the nearest one and tore its head off its shoulders. Balling his hands into fists he swiftly dispatched another one, quick precise blows crushing its skull and breaking its spine. The last zombie on the other side of the room never saw the Marine leap over the sarcophagus and kick it down, caving in its head with a single furious stomp.

If there were zombies here, there would be other demons as well. Bigger and stronger. The Marine was bare and carried nothing but his now bloody fists, and within his bones he could feel a great weariness. He had slept for too long, his forced repose and whatever enchantments cast upon him having drained his strength. If he was to push on he’d need tools. He needed his armor, and he needed-

A hard irregular object beneath the Marine's foot caught his attention. He looked down to find himself stepping on a green-and-black handgun. The Marine picked it up. It was an old weapon, the metal dull and the plastic grip scratched. There were five bullets in the magazine. Too light and weak to worry anything past small fry, but it was all he had.

Loading the pistol, the Marine walked up to a placard on the wall. It was a simple diagram describing the layout of the outpost he found himself in, a certain Site 03. There was the sarcophagus room, comms room, loading dock, Praetor research room-

There it was. Memorizing the diagram, the Marine turned to the door. It was a simple glass-and-metal barrier, the access pad glowing faintly on the wall beside, but the Marine needed to prove something. With a strong kick the metal bars broke and the reinforced glass went flying. The Marine smirked. So his strength wasn’t entirely gone.

Setting off into the pitch-black corridor, the Marine kept his gaze keen and his weapon ready. He didn’t know the extent of this demonic incursion and needed to take the necessary steps as quickly as possible, but before that he needed his suit. He passed various dim hallways and locked rooms, his eyes constantly darting on the search for any potential threat. Blood splatters stained the walls, occasionally streaking off beneath some door or into some dark recess.

The Marine turned a corner to find a group of zombies huddled along the corridor. Alerted to his presence, the Marine sprung to action.

Seven heads, five bullets.

PEW PEW! Two zombies slumped to the floor, the holes in their heads faintly smoking.

PEW! The bullet entered another’s skull but at a shallow angle, and the creature was still standing. PEW! A second shot finally dropped it.

BANG! The Marine grimaced as buckshot tore his flesh. The zombie at the far end was a former soldier, decked in white body armor and a long shotgun in its hands. But it was not like the other zombies around it; its posture was sharp and focused, its red eyes glowing with knowing malice. As the soldier reloaded its firearm, the Marine took aim.

PEW! But the soldier dodged the shot, rolling out of the way at the very last second and raising its shotgun.

Quick as lightning, the Marine grabbed the nearest zombie by the neck and held it aloft. The soldier fired and the Marine’s meat shield blocked the shot, but it wouldn’t last much longer. The Marine charged as the soldier reloaded his weapon and took aim.

BANG! The zombie’s guts blew out in a sloughy mess. BANG! The legs fell off as its spine was severed. One more shot and the Marine’s meat shield would be done for.

BANG! The zombie crumbled apart in the Marine’s hands, and he was left holding nothing but a bloody head. Close enough to attack, he lobbed the head at the soldier before it could fire again. The soldier faltered as the head struck it, and the Marine shifted his grip on his handgun. He struck the soldier with the pistol butt before finishing it off with a quick uppercut.

Momentarily dropping his guard, the Marine saw the soldier’s shotgun was directly fused with its arm, fleshy tendrils snaking all along the weapon’s casing and components. It was clearly far too corrupted to remove, but surely there would be a suitable replacement nearby. He noted a pistol magazine attached to the soldier’s belt. A piquing idea forming in his mind, the Marine discarded the empty clip from his handgun and focused on the fresh one on the floor.

In the blink of an eye, the clip leapt from the floor to the Marine’s waiting pistol, smoothly sliding in with a satisfying click. The Marine cracked a smile. Some things are never forgotten.

A painful blow to the back shattered the Marine’s moment. He’d forgotten about the last two zombies, who had finally caught up to him. His anger resurging, he tore one’s arm off and struck the creature down with it before kicking in the other’s knee and twisting its head off. As they crumbled into putrid heaps on the floor, thin wisps of scarlet energy rose from the corpses and were absorbed by the Marine, his wounds closing in a faint red glow. The Marine let out a sigh as his vitality was restored.

Turning his sight down the corridor he found he’d arrived at his destination, the object of his search on the other side of a glass-and-steel door. The door slid up as he approached, and he took a moment to admire his most prized possession.

There, embedded within an ancient stone altar, was the Praetor Suit. Nicked and scarred with the marks of a thousand battles, its joints encrusted with countless layers of dried blood and dirt, but still in one piece and seemingly functional. He approached the suit and placed his hand on it.

Madness.

Mind-splitting madness.

Before his eyes passed countless nightmarish visions, each one more terrible than the last.

A masked figure in crimson cloak. A flaming sword. A towering monstrosity born of flesh and metal. The Key Holder becoming one with the Master. The Deagic Council of Three. A golden being of a thousand faces. The Blasphemous One, with four burnt wings and in its head a-

The Marine cleared his mind and forced his eyes to open. Only a few seconds had passed, but to him they felt an eternity. The curse had worn off, and he noticed the small red bulb on the Praetor Suit’s breastplate blinking to life. Electricity sparked across the suit’s exterior as its systems activated, and with a single thrust it broke free from the stone altar, setting loose a cascade of pebbles on the hard floor. Holding its arms out, the suit unfolded in anticipation of its wearer’s arrival. After the briefest pause, the Marine set his pistol down on a nearby monitor and walked up to the suit, placing himself inside. He couldn’t help but feel a wave of warm familiarity wash over him as the armor closed itself around him, its parts sealing shut to leave not the slightest seam behind. The helmet came down over his head as the suit’s neural interface linked with him, and the augmented reality visor came online.

?

…RESTORING SYSTEM…SYSTEM PARTIALLY RESTORED

SEVERAL MODULES ARE DAMAGED AND/OR NON-OPERATIONAL

…COMMENCING REBOOT…

The Marine stared in grim silence. His Praetor Suit was damaged too? With weakened body and disabled equipment, stopping the infernal legions would be much more difficult. A counter come to view on the lower-left corner of his HUD:

ARMOR – 0

HEALTH – 100

A clean bill of health, but that didn’t worry him. With mental commands, he accessed his suit’s directory and brought up his weapon cache. After ages of fighting demons across worlds and realms, he’d accumulated a veritable armory of strange and powerful weapons. Hopefully he could use them.

To his dismay, the cache was unresponsive. The weapon files remained in the directory, but selecting them produced an error message:

ERROR: STORAGE MATRIX HAS BEEN CORRUPTED – REPAIR IS REQUIRED

PRESENT ARSENAL IS CURRENTLY UNAVAILABLE

He couldn’t access his arsenal? This human facility wouldn’t offer more than meager armaments, hardly fit for slaying demonic hordes, and he didn’t have the time or means to repair his Praetor Suit here. How was he supposed to stop the invasion?

Concerned, the Marine ran a system diagnostic and studied the results. Fortunately, the fabrication modules were fully operational, which meant a dependable supply of munitions, armor, and equipment. He’d even be able to construct new tools and incorporate them into his system, if he found the right resources.

But the Vanguard Gauntlet was disabled, the Equipment Launcher was destroyed, the Paragon Shield was gone. The Marine sighed. This complicated matters.

He stared at the pistol still lying on the terminal. He picked it up and stared as thin blue bolts arced from his hand to the weapon, just as its schematics and operation data appeared displayed on his HUD. The suit was scanning the pistol at the molecular level, reverse-engineering it, improving it.

UAC .45 STANDARD-ISSUE HANDGUN ACQUIRED

SYNCHRONIZATION TO AUTOMATIC FEED AND STORAGE MATRIX COMPLETE

MUNITION TYPE – BULLETS

SECONDARY FIRING MODE – RAPID FIRE

A second counter appeared on his HUD’s lower-right corner, displaying his current ammo count and the handgun’s silhouette as a small icon beside it. The Marine blew air out his nose in displeasure. At least he could add new items to his repository, but it didn’t mean much if he couldn’t get his hands on bigger and better tools.

Putting the pistol away for the time being – which seemed to suddenly vanish into thin air – he turned his attention to the monitor he’d placed it on.

DEMONIC INVASION IN PROGRESS

If nothing else, these people were certainly observant. The Marine noticed the date displayed in the screen’s corner: October 2149. Had it been so long already? Or perhaps, so little? He sighed. It didn’t matter. Time didn’t mean what it used to.

Returning to the task at hand, he pressed a button labeled STATUS REPORT and waited for the command for load.

…INITIATING SCAN…SCAN INCOMPLETE

REPORT ERROR

SATELLITE DISH ARRAY: OFFLINE

The Marine wouldn’t be able to determine the cause of the invasion until the array malfunction was corrected, which the network placed at a Resource Operations facility. He traced the position of the faulty satellite dish, downloading the geographic data to his suit’s operating system when an incoming voice comm appeared on the screen.

“Welcome.” It was a robotic voice, deep and resonating. “I’m Dr. Samuel Hayden, I’m the head of this facility. I think we can work together-” And that’s as far as the voice went before the Marine punched the monitor, the screen shattering and the whole terminal crashing loudly against the wall.

The Marine turned back where he came from and set off towards the outpost’s exit. His stride was slightly more confident navigating the dark halls wearing full armor as opposed to nothing at all, and he allowed his posture to relax somewhat.

As he approached an access port he noticed a bloodied figure lying outstretched beneath said door. It was the corpse of a soldier in white armor, its torso cleanly severed by the downward force of the door above it. But what drew the Marine’s attention was the object still clenched in its hands, a long silvery pump-action shotgun. The Marine pried it from the corpse’s fingers and turned it over, admiring its craftsmanship and simple but sturdy design.

DS-117 COMBAT SHOTGUN ACQUIRED

SYNCHRONIZATION TO AUTOMATIC FEED AND STORAGE MATRIX COMPLETE

MUNITION TYPE – SHELLS

SECONDARY FIRING MODE – SHRAPNEL SHOT

The Marine’s brow furrowed in irritation. The Praetor Suit’s reboot clearly reset its system configurations, these HUD notifications intruding on his field of view. Through the suit’s neural interface, he accessed its HUD settings and deactivated notifications for redundant information.

…SAVING CHANGES…CHANGES COMPLETE

The Marine humphed as he stooped to pry the door open, immediately noticing the harsh ardent smell reminiscent of burning sulfur. His shotgun was cocked and ready by the time the nimble figure jumped down from pipes hanging from the ceiling. It was a pathetic creature: brown and hunched, with exposed teeth, smoking claws, and pale spikes protruding from its body. The intention to open its mouth to roar briefly crossed the imp’s brain before it was splattered across the wall by 12-gauge buckshot.

The Marine was about to take off without a second thought before he noticed the shotgun was almost empty, holding only five shells in storage. His anger spiking, the Marine turned to kick the bottom half of the soldier’s corpse to pick up any additional ammo it might have carried. Sure enough three shotgun clips flew out, raising his shell count from five to twenty. The Marine turned to leave with a vein still throbbing in his temple.

He was in the loading dock, a long empty chamber with ramps and doors leading to other parts of the facility, a few red barrels scattered atop pallet jacks. In the center stood a large gaping organic construct, its mouth sparking with glowing red portal and a small crowd of huddled figures prostrated around it. He recognized the scene but had no time for the Gore Nest or the zombies worshipping it, rather sidestepping them to head for the bulkhead door at the far end of the room. It was sealed though, a bright red holographic display reading ACCESS DENIED.

“Demonic presence at unsafe levels,” the facility’s automated voice system announced. “Lockdown in effect.”

The Marine promptly punched the door but it would not open, the thick metal denting but not breaking. His rage surging past its breaking point, he tore off back where the Gore Nest and zombies still kneeled in unholy adoration. With a flying kick he broke the Nest apart and crushed its heart beneath his feet just as he drew his pistol. The zombies fell with single well-placed shots as the dying Gore Nest released a hellish screech, its death cry a call for reinforcement. The Marine had already dispatched all the zombies and had just equipped his shotgun when, in swirls of bright red flame, the swarm of imps and possessed soldiers materialized.

BANG BANG! Two soldiers fell as their chests were reduced to little more than shredded meat. An imp leapt up to the ceiling and hung upside down, a fireball forming in one hand. BANG! The imp fell lifelessly and its fireball dissipated into nothing. Other imps darted across the room, quickly jumping onto walls and lobbing burning fireballs at the Marine, trails of acrid smoke in their wake. The Marine rolled out of their way as he switched to his pistol. PEW PEW PEW! He fired off a flurry of shots in their direction, some missing but a few managing to kill the speedy pests.

A burst of rifle fire struck the Marine’s back, his HEALTH counter dropping to 95. He turned to find a zombieman pointing an assault rifle in his direction, its beady eyes casting a sinister red glare. Eyeing two imps approaching from his backside, the Marine had an idea. He rolled out of the way of the soldier’s attack just as the imps pounced, causing the soldier to shoot the imps instead. With furious screeches the imps turned on the zombieman, clawing and tearing at it just as the soldier himself returned fire.

The Marine left the three to finish each other off when a stream of bright blue spheres hit his chest, spreading waves of searing heat that felt as if penetrating his whole torso. A former soldier in white armor stood behind a support column holding a plasma rifle. The Marine shot at it but it rolled out of the way, dropping down to one knee and raising its weapon as its muzzle began to glow and whir. The Marine attempted to run behind another column when the soldier struck him with a wave of searing heat discharged from its rifle, bringing his HEALTH down to 89.

Snarling in pain and anger, the Marine grabbed a nearby zombie scientist and threw it at the soldier as it prepared to release another heat blast. The zombie hit the soldier just as it pulled the trigger, setting the two on fire. The zombie crumbled into ash and the soldier clawed at itself in desperation, which the Marine finished with a precise shotgun blast.

He was running low on shells. He glanced at a group of zombies as the imps got closer.

The Marine charged as he switched to the .45. PEW PEW! Imp down. Another leapt at the Marine with outstretched claws. PEW PEW PEW! Down and out. The Marine approached the zombies and raised his fists. Left hook, a zombie fell. Right hook, uppercut, the second crumbled as the third one’s head splattered the ceiling. All the while the Marine noted their viscera and energy being absorbed into him, producing fresh munitions just as his HEALTH slowly ticked up. A strong kick sent the last zombie flying at two soldiers, all three exploding in a mess of gore and organs.

The Marine withdrew his restocked shotgun and raised it once more, this time not aiming at any demon but rather at a jack loaded with red barrels. Taking careful aim, he shot the jack and watched as the barrels toppled over and rolled throughout the room. Eyeing the remaining imps and soldiers darting across the chamber, the Marine loaded a shrapnel shot and fired. At once the entire room exploded, bright swells of flame and shards of metal soaring through the air.

When the smoke cleared the Marine stood in an empty room, blood splatters and bits of flesh the only indication that other life had once been present. He checked his HEALTH: 99.

Unacceptable.

He was too slow, his senses dulled by his long rest. He needed to get his strength back, and fast.

“Demonic presence eliminated. Lockdown disengaged.”

The flashing sirens turned green and the red hologram over the exit vanished. Faintly satisfied, the Marine made his way to the exit.

As he passed through the gate a holographic recording appeared in his path, depicting some standing figure in seeming deep thought but he paid it no mind. Passing straight through it, he heard the figure indistinctly start to speak as he entered the access elevator and the doors sealed behind him. There was a touchscreen on the elevator wall, an upward arrow softly pulsing. The pad was stained with bloody handprints from a man’s corpse lying on the floor. He pressed it and immediately afterward a voice comm appeared on the screen.

“I’m willing to take full responsibility for the horrible events of the last twenty-four hours but you must understand…” It was the same droning voice. “Our interest in their world was purely for the betterment of mankind .”

The Marine looked down at the corpse at his feet. A victim of this voice’s “betterment.” The Marine cracked his knuckles in barely contained fury as the voice continued.

“Everything has clearly gotten out of hand now, yes, but it was worth the ri- Please don’t smash the panel.” The Marine smashed the panel, which exploded in a shower of glass and sparks. Moments later, the elevator stopped and the doors opened onto a familiar orange landscape.

* * *?

Freezing cold temperature. Thin dry atmosphere. Reddish-brown dirt. The Marine was on Mars. He stopped a moment to take in the sight: dusty air currents rushed past the windswept terrain as distant towers contrasted darkly against the backlit cloud cover. It was evening, the sun hanging low on the amber Martian sky. A crashed shuttle lay not too far away, its engines still smoking and far too damaged to be of any use.

The Marine neurally signaled his suit to mark the Resource Ops facility on his HUD. Roughly a kilometer away, past some industrial refineries and archaeological excavation sites. He cocked his shotgun and set off across the Martian surface.

The Marine jogged in silence across the otherwise uneventful landscape. The outpost he had just left was built underground, the access elevator descending and sealing shut in an uninteresting metal hatch when he exited. At least for the time being, there seemed to be nothing that demanded the Marine’s attention, and he was fine with that. He allowed himself a few moments of relaxation as he ran at an acceptable pace, even comfortable in the low Martian gravity.

He reached the first of the excavation sites, a small shallow basin spreading out beneath him. Here lied the first signs of civilization since the outpost and shuttle, despite being empty of life itself.

Although to what civilization these belonged to was another question.

Littering the site were clearly man-made objects. Flood lamps, tool boxes, and environment suits were obvious examples, along with the odd human corpse that never seemed too far away. But the very site seemed built for the purpose of unearthing other, more enigmatic artifacts. The Marine jumped down, landing softly despite the imposing height of the ledge he’d just been on.

There were four low stone columns built symmetrically within the basin, constructed in some grand architectural style of ages past. Large engraved symbols glowed faintly on their surfaces, but these weren’t the arcane runes of Hell. The Marine could recognize better than anyone the writing and architecture of the ancient Martian people. Well, Martian beings, for they certainly hadn’t been human.

The columns were built in front of passageways leading deeper into the rusty surface, flood lamps and cables leading into the darkness. The cavern archways were of the same architecture as the columns before them, and the Marine knew the caverns continued deeper below, long abandoned by their original habitants. He noted that the columns and caverns pointed in three of the basin’s cardinal directions, the fourth column in front of an open channel that led south, in the direction of the Res Ops facility.

He headed in that direction. There was no insight the Marine could gleam from these crumbling ruins that he did not already know, and he had more pressing matters to attend to.

After a few minutes the Marine reached a point where the narrow channel split into a junction. Narrow passages spread out on either side, leading to industrial refineries but eventually converging back at Res Ops. The way forward was more direct but was blocked by a metal gate.

ACCESS DENIED, the blue holographic display read. LEVEL 1 ACCESS REQUIRED

give key?, the Marine hopefully input into his suit’s interface.

ERROR: SECURITY BYPASS MODULE OFFL-

A swift punch sent the flimsy metal door flying, and the Marine felt his irritation subside with the loud and satisfying CRUNCH it made as he walked over it.

The narrow channel opened onto a flat stretch of land on which Resource Operations lay. The Marine felt dwarfed by the imposing size of the facility in front of him, which was only part of a larger colony that sprawled across the Martian surface. The base was built on the edge of a great valley, distant cliffs barely visible through the amber haze.

?

His HUD marked the only functional entrance to the facility past some low installations, at the end of an elevated tramway that once crossed a nearby ravine. The Marine could see a few scattered zombies and soldiers leading up to the entrance, and he guessed there were more hidden among the structures. He was stocked on ammo, but this was no time to get ambushed by a crowd.

The Marine dejectedly exhaled. Only one thing to do.

He pulled out his handgun and charged.

Most of the zombies hit the ground long before they had a chance to react. By the time the soldiers noticed the Marine he had already pulled out his shotgun. BANG! Soldier turned to red fleshy paste. BANG! Another fell before it could fire a heat blast. The Marine noticed swells of scarlet flame out of the corner of his eye and prepared to fight the next wave.

A swarm of imps warped in but these were different. Larger, more muscular, and leering wickedly at the Marine. A greater number of spikes extruded from their body, and their skin was a deep black.

When he saw them casting green fireballs in their hands, the Marine wisely decided to run for cover.

The fireballs flamed through the space where the Marine had just been, striking at his heels as he rolled behind a piece of machinery. Those green fireballs were faster than the ones thrown by normal imps, and the Marine guessed they hit harder too. But he couldn’t stay hunkered down. The environment was too open and unsuitable for defense, and imps never stayed put. Steeling himself, he switched to his shotgun and leapt out of cover.

BANG BANG! He dropped two dark imps with cold determination. A squad of soldiers approached on the left, from which the Marine distanced himself to focus on the imps. BANG! He shot another but it was still standing, a blue fireball forming in its hand. The Marine reloaded his shotgun as the imp threw the fireball. He swerved out of the ball’s trajectory but to his surprise it changed direction mid-air and struck him in the arm, his HEALTH dropping to 87. Angered, the Marine finished the imp off with a shotgun blast as the soldiers drew nearer. Having grown frustrated with the monsters and his own lack of combat options, the Marine decided to just run for the entrance.

He left the soldiers behind and dodged the imps’ fireballs as he jumped from ledge to ledge, climbing up to where the tramway led into the Res Ops facility. Despite his efforts he was struck by several fireballs and plasma bolts, his HEALTH dropping to 28 but he wasn’t concerned. There would certainly be medical supplies in the facility, what was crucial was him getting inside.

He made the last jump and climbed up to the tramway. Looking down to see if the imps or soldiers had followed, he didn’t even check if he was alone. All he heard was the whirr of a minigun spinning up, and a flash of red light before a hail of bullets tore him apart and the world went black.

* * *?

The Marine woke up. He stood at the entrance to the channel that led back to the excavation site. Resource Ops loomed ominously in front of him. From his position he could still see zombies and soldiers dispersed across the rusty Martian expanse.

Infuriated, the Marine punched the rock walls beside him. His fists sunk deep into the stone, cracks spreading out and a shower of pebbles tumbling down to the dirt.

He’d been killed. A momentary lapse of judgement had caused him to miss the soldier hidden in the shadows by the facility entrance, and he had paid for that mistake.

Not that he was any worse for the wear. He was in one piece and still had all his tools. His HEALTH was even back at 100.

But that wasn’t the point. There was an invasion here, and it needed to be stopped as quickly as possible. Dying costed time. Precious time that he did not have.

The sound of pebbles striking metal jarred him from his thoughts. There was a small beige box at his feet, hidden almost invisibly besides the dirt and rock. He crouched to open it.

It was a grenade box. Neatly stored inside were five green fragmentation grenades, their silver handles gleaming dimly in the light. The Marine picked one up.

UAC FRAG GRENADE ACQUIRED

IDENTIFIED AS EQUIPMENT – SYNCHRONIZED TO EQUIPMENT MODULE

NOTICE: EQUIPMENT LAUNCHER IS DAMAGED

MANUAL LAUNCH OF SECONDARY ITEMS IS REQUIRED

His equipment launcher was destroyed, but the Marine didn’t care. These frag grenades suited him just fine. He grabbed the rest – which seemed to vanish into thin air – and stared back towards the Res Ops entrance.

The corpses of the demons he’d killed still lay on the Martian dirt, but more had arrived to take their place. The Marine groaned in disgust. Demons were a pest, the only way to eliminate them was to slaughter every last one.

He loaded a shrapnel shot into his shotgun. And that was exactly what he was going to do. He charged.

A mob of zombies blew apart as the shrapnel shot exploded in their midst, sending burning shrapnel tearing through their flesh. The soldiers turned around and roared in aggression, but a second shrapnel shot shut them up. By the time the dark imps warped in, the Marine was ready.

BANG! A dark imp took a shrapnel shot straight in the chest and flew off in eight different directions. BANG! The headless corpse of another tumbled down after a shrapnel shot exploded in its roaring mouth. All the while the Marine constantly strafed to avoid their attacks, being mindful of the fast green fireballs and the homing blue ones.

Eyeing the soldiers approaching from his flank, the Marine strafed in their direction rather than retreating. As some soldiers fell to the dark imps’ fireballs, he took care of the rest. BANG! BANG! BANG! With liberal use of shrapnel shots he swiftly eliminated their ranks. Noting his shells were running low, he ran up to a soldier and swiftly dispatched him with a quick punch. Five shells. A normal imp leapt beside him and slashed at him with burning claws. Punch, six bullets. He climbed the ledges up to where a dark imp was lobbing fireballs at him. Left, right, uppercut. The Marine exulted as his ammo returned and the small health boosts topped his counter to 107.

The second wave of soldiers stormed in from the shadows. In a single move, the Marine withdrew a grenade, coolly flicked the safety mechanism off, and threw it at the crowd.

POW! Half of the soldiers exploded in bits of flesh and guts. The Marine threw a second grenade and climbed towards the entrance. POW! He didn’t see the explosion, but the wet splashes and following silence indicated all the soldiers were dead. He glanced at the last of the dark imps leaping about the structures. With precise shrapnel shots he finished them off and prepared himself for the final enemy hidden by the facility entrance.

The Marine jumped onto the tramway and glanced at the shadowy recess where the tramway ended. There, almost invisibly, stood the hulking figure of a heavy weapons commando. It wore red body armor and carried an enormous minigun in its hands. Its body was grotesquely swollen, however. So much that the grey bodysuit under its red armor had torn in several places, the sleeves having long since fallen off its grossly muscled arms. Its only clearly visible parts where the two red lights that brightly shone from its armor, one in the center of its helmet and the other in its chest.

As soon as the Marine climbed onto the tramway, the commando turned and yelled “ENEMY SIGHTED!” The Marine loaded and fired a shrapnel shot at the soldier. The shot hit but did not falter its target, which remained standing and charged up its minigun.

The Marine ran as the commando started firing. He did his best to dodge its fire but had limited space on the narrow tramway, wincing as the slugs ripped through his body.

Falling back to put some space between himself and the monster, the Marine threw a grenade at it. But it was too low, and the grenade exploded harmlessly on the floor. He grabbed another and threw it higher, but a stray slug hit his arm, and the grenade flew to the side and off the tramway.

With 54 HEALTH left, the Marine crouched behind a cart still parked on the rail. But the bullets kept coming, and the commando was drawing closer.

“YOU WILL NOT ESCAPE!” He heard it shout.

The Marine peered from behind cover to fire a shrapnel shot, only to have a bullet strike his face. He quickly ducked back with 42 HEALTH.

"HELL AWAITS YOU!”

The Marine breathed heavy. He only had one grenade, he was low on ammo, and his luck was running out. He couldn’t die again. Not now. Every moment he wasted was another demon breaking through to this universe. Another chance for Hell to reach Earth.

With gritted teeth, the Marine cocked his shotgun and leapt from cover, charging at the commando.

Taking careful aim, the Marine threw his last grenade at the monster. The grenade bounced some distance away but it was close enough, and the commando faltered by the blast. Taking advantage of the monster’s lapse in aggression, the Marine loaded a shrapnel shot and fired it at the commando’s head. The shot hit its mark but the commando did not fall, its helmet breaking to reveal a bald man with a circle beard and bloody mouth. His red eyes cast an evil, reproachful glare.

The commando spun up its weapon once more, but with no options left the Marine kept charging. The storm of bullets returned, and the Marine couldn’t help but watch as they pierced through his armor and hacked away at his HEALTH.

At that moment the Marine was overwhelmed with rage. A bright, swelling, incendiary surge of rage that seemed to set his blood ablaze.

He was furious.

Furious that he’d been forced to sleep for God-knows-how-long, furious that his strength and powers had been drained, furious that his arsenal was gone and he was forced to stop this invasion with no tools, furious that demons had invaded his universe and placed humanity in danger.

But most of all, he thought as he balled his hand into a fist, he was furious that this commando even existed.

With all his strength, the Marine slammed his fist against the commando’s chest. At once the monster seemed to explode in a fountain of blood, body parts and armor flying in every direction. The minigun it held dropped loudly on the floor, powering down and smoking heavily.

The Marine breathed heavily, his armor covered in blood, standing above a pile of gore that had once been the commando. He took a moment to absorb the monster’s energy and heal his wounds. He stared at his fist which dripped with thick red blood. It seemed to even be smoking from the force of the impact.

As he stared, though, his arm really did set afire, bright scarlet flames reaching from elbow to fingertips. The flames suddenly vanished as quickly as they appeared, and a message appeared on his HUD:

BLOOD RAGE RESTORED – CRITICAL HEALTH WILL BOOST MELEE DAMAGE

BLOOD PUNCH RESTORED – FOCUS POWER INTO PUNCH TO UNLEASH A DEVASTATING BLOW WITH A SECONDARY WAVE ON IMPACT

The Marine’s breathing eased. His heart felt to be beating stronger, the fight must have returned some of his strength. But it wouldn’t help much if he didn’t have-

A glint of silver amidst the gore caught his eye. He stooped and picked up a gleaming black-and-silver pistol from the remains of the commando, far larger than the .45 in his possession. The edges of the barrel were painted a deep red, and on the side he could read a “BFP” etched on the metal. He chuckled as the notification appeared on his HUD:

EMG MARK V PISTOL ACQUIRED

MUNITION TYPE – BULLETS

SECONDARY FIRING MODE – CHARGED SHOT

He weighed the pistol in his hand. It was certainly heavier than the .45. Probably not as strong as he would have preferred, but it would do.

The Marine turned to the smoking chaingun at his feet. It was permeated with throbbing fleshy tissue, too infected to be of use, but its ammo belt seemed functional. The Marine extracted the belt and added it to his storage matrix, grinning when he saw his bullet count rocket from 20 to 200.

With a new weapon and full ammo, the Marine entered the loading bay at the end of the tramway, which led into Resource Ops. There were toolboxes, supply crates, carts parked along the rail, even two medikits lying by the airlock. They were small white boxes with a blue cross on their lids. The Marine crouched and opened one. There were two bottles of translucent blue gel inside, along with application utensils and instructions. The Marine took both bottles in one hand, briefly contemplated, and crushed them. He felt immediate relief as the gels soaked into his suit and were absorbed by his body, raising his HEALTH to 38. He stood and crushed the other medikit with his boot, which brought his HEALTH up to 63.

Even with reduced health, the Marine stepped into the airlock with resolute focus and pressed a glowing pad that read ENTER FACILITY. As he did, a holographic recording of a young woman appeared by the gate.

“Welcome to the Union Aerospace Corporation, also known as the UAC,” she exclaimed in a bright and peppy voice. “Now 221 accident-free days.”

As the gate closed and the airlock cycled, the Marine hoped he wouldn’t have to hear her chirpy voice throughout his journey.


E1M2: Knee-Deep in the Dead?

Ruby cautiously opened the elevator door, pistol at the ready. It had been a while since the screams and roars died down, but she wasn’t taking any chances.

The corridor was dark, illuminated only by flashing sirens and the occasional sparking. Ruby moved out quietly, taking care not to step on some piece of glass or other debris.

She was in the Mars Base Hospital, medical equipment and the corpses of hospital workers strewn across the floor.

What the hell happened here, she thought to herself as she walked past the ravaged bodies.

Probably just that. Hell.

After a few moments of pure silence, Ruby put her weapon down and breathed deeply, temporarily assured she was alone.

She needed to get to a VEGA terminal. She needed to establish contact with Command and figure out what was going on.

Tightening her grip on her pistol, Ruby set off with a brisk pace for the hospital’s administrative deck. She stepped into a staircase, as the elevators would be too loud, and climbed up towards the terminal.

Ruby reached the floor at the very top of the staircase, the one that housed the hospital’s administrative services, but entry was blocked by a locked gate that required identity verification.

Glancing backwards to make sure she was alone, Ruby pressed the glowing pad and spoke.

“This is UAC Elite Guard Ruby Taylor, requesting access.”

The gate’s light turned green as the automated voice system replied.

“Credentials accepted. Hello, Agent Taylor.”

* * *?

As the airlock cycled, the Marine felt the gravity field inside the chamber grow stronger as the facility’s acclimation mechanisms kicked in.

An incoming voice comm transmitted into the Praetor Suit’s systems.

<Hello. I am VEGA, the sentient artificial intelligence assigned to Mars.> It was a new voice, robotic but more audibly pleasant than that of Doctor Hayden. The Marine might have even described it as warm. The UAC had finally built talking computers.

<Doctor Hayden has assigned me to assist you in any way possible. After running diagnostics on the active Praetor Suit, I have concluded that both you and the Suit are operating at reduced capacity. I have programmed a Power Engine into the Praetor Suit’s subroutines. It will scan your neural activity during moments of exceptional performance and allow you to tactically reproduce it. I will add relevant components to your display and Dossier.>

Two counters appeared on his HUD’s upper corners, labeled “Calibrator” and “Tracker.” The Marine shrugged. He’d figure out how they worked later. At least the computer wasn’t going to be a hindrance.

The gate opened and the Marine boldly entered the facility, immediately noticing the Earth-like gravity and lack of illumination. The Base’s power must have been cut off.

He recalled an old trick he used to wield, a simple but effective skill to navigate even the most distracting or obscure of environments. He closed his eyes and filtered out the blaring sirens, focusing on building a clear mental image of his surroundings. The shadowy outline of the corridor seemed to come into view, but after a few moments it dissipated like smoke. The Marine made a greater effort to build the image, but he couldn’t sustain it. His strength had not returned yet.

Opening his eyes, he brought up his Suit’s automap feature onto his display to see if he could navigate through it, but no such luck. The Base’s walls were too thick and his scanning system had limited range. He could spy a group of red dots in the room just around the corner, meaning his scanner’s demonic module was operational, but he couldn’t see any further than that. He closed the automap in frustration.

<There is a flashlight in the toolbox to your right,> spoke the computer. <You can use it to navigate the facility.>

Sure enough, in an open toolbox not far from a dead worker, was a heavy metallic flashlight. Very heavy, in fact. He turned it on. Just as he contemplated how narrow the beam of light was, not to mention dim, the flashlight sputtered out and died.

In the fraction of a second the Marine was racing down the corridor at full speed, his blood burning with ravenous rage. He was going to splatter somebody’s brains, and he didn’t care whose.

He turned the corner into the intersection of a mining deck, the red dots turning out to be a few zombies slowly ambling in the dark. Without hesitation, the Marine grabbed the head of the flashlight and brought the handle down on one, feeling instant satisfaction as its skull cracked open like an egg. He swinged the flashlight at another’s head, sending it flying clean off its shoulders. Dropkicking another, he mercilessly beat it into a bloody pulp. With cold and expeditious fury he slaughtered them all, holding a dented flashlight dripping with blood and brain matter. He dropped it while breathing heavily.

He hated using flashlights.

His anger subsided, the Marine turned to the signs printed on the corridor walls, searching for the one that led to a system terminal. Finding it, the Marine headed in that direction.

The hallway was dim but barely navigable from the flashing sirens and lights that shone through the grated floor.

The Marine climbed a stairway up to the system terminal. It stood in front of exterior windows whose blast shields had been activated by the lockdown. He pressed a screen that read RESTORE POWER.

…REROUTING POWER…POWER RESTORED

The blast shields lifted as the fluorescent lighting flickered back on, and the Marine could see the faulty satellite dish through the windows.

A screen beside him switched on.

“I believe in honesty. Especially now, in what will be your final moments in this world.”

A puzzled Marine turned to the screen. It was a thin elderly woman speaking. She wore a mechanical bodysuit and her complexion was cold yet perverse. The Marine recognized her: she was the same figure whose hologram he’d seen as he exited Site 03.

“All the rumors…the human sacrifices, the Hell portal, the demons…it’s all true.”

Her demeanor was very matter-of-fact and detached, considering the subject matter, and her stiff arrogance aggravated the Marine. Had the screen not displayed PREVIOUSLY RECORDED below the woman’s transmission, he would have thought she was speaking to him. Regardless, he did not like her.

“My sisters and brothers be thankful. You will be the first. You will have a seat alongside them-”

A point-blank shotgun blast promptly silenced the woman’s rambling.

She was one of those then, the Marine thought. Perfect.

<That was Doctor Olivia Pierce,> commented the computer, <head of the UAC’s Biochemical Research Division and Director of the Lazarus Project.> Lazarus Project. That didn’t sound good. The Marine made a mental note to investigate the Lazarus Project as he prepared to leave.

<If I may, the database terminal to your left contains a complete detail of the facility’s structure and resources. You can download the data into your Suit to complete your automap.>

The Marine turned to the screen beside him, which read FACILITY MAP READY. He pressed the DOWNLOAD button on the screen and noted the AUTOMAP UPDATED message appear on his HUD.

Bringing up his automap once more, he marveled at the real-time 3D diagram displayed in his visor. It was an extensive compound, built into the Martian landscape for mining and…plasma extraction.

Plasma extraction? On Mars? The Marine frowned as he continued to study the map.

Linked directly to the facility’s systems, his boosted scanner marked the exact positions and identities of all usable items and demonic invaders in the installation, which appeared as miniature models in the diagram. But that didn’t matter, the Marine needed to reach the satellite array to realign the faulty dish. Studying the map, he calculated the shortest route to the array and switched off the automap. He noted an icon resembling a map station had appeared under the “Tracker” component in his HUD. So it was some kind of utility tracker, the Marine concluded.

<All UAC installations have a terminal from which you can download their complete facility maps. I will unlock the remaining stations in the Base, but you will have to manually download their data.>

Cocking his shotgun, the Marine headed for the satellite array.

The Res Ops facility was certainly more visually impressive when fully illuminated. This particular sector was a sprawl of grey and yellow-painted metal, with slender walkways and railings crisscrossing a wide cavern beside the exposed Martian surface. Steam and smoke lazily drifted from lower levels as machinery rumbled deep below.

The Marine contemplated this arrangement as he climbed the walkways. Martian soil was supposed to be toxic to normal humans, and the atmosphere pumped within the facility was very much breathable. Did this company have its employees breathing toxic Martian dust, or were they augmented in some way to be resistant to this environment?

The Marine got his answer as he approached a pair of corpses outside a sealed door, blood trails streaking across the ground: it didn’t matter anymore.

One of the corpses was of a decapitated soldier, and his HUD outlined the soldier’s cuirass. It seemed to be in good condition, and the Marine guessed the soldier wouldn’t need it anymore. Setting his boot softly on the soldier’s chest, the Marine watched as the cuirass dissolved into a swarm of metallic fragments and was absorbed by his Suit, bringing his ARMOR up to 50.

Lightly bowing his head at the soldier, the Marine approached the gate. It was jammed shut, and the sparks flying from its frame indicated it was malfunctioning. Grabbing hold of the dual doors’ edges, the Marine pried open the gate into a dock crowded with zombies and imps.

A few steps away stood a former engineer, whose body had been grossly fused with a large acetylene tank which now perforated its torso. As soon as the Marine opened the gate, this worker shambled towards him with a deep gargling sound. A reflexive kick sent the zombie flying at the others behind it, exploding and killing three others with it. With the rest of the demons alerted to his presence, the Marine stormed into the dock.

It was an elevated clearing that must have been a transportation hub. Supply crates and explosive barrels littered the floor, with only flimsy waist-high railings standing between the walkways and the yawning depths.

BANG BANG BANG! The Marine swiftly dispatched the closest enemies with precise shotgun blasts. He loaded a shrapnel shot. BANG POOWW! A zombie engineer and two imps exploded in a swell of flame and blood. A new sound beside him drew his attention, a fast whirring that sounded like a power tool switching on. Turning to the sound, the Marine barely managed to dodge a faceful of spinning metal teeth. It was a zombified worker with a chainsaw fused to its hands, hellbent on slashing the Marine with it. Moving fast before the zombie could attack again, the Marine grabbed the zombie’s arm and forced the chainsaw to its own head, moving on to a pair of imps as the dying zombie howled in agony.

The Marine switched to his new EMG pistol. POW! He gaped as the target dark imp’s head disappeared in a burst of bone and brain. He aimed at another’s chest. POW POW! The Marine was sure he could fit his arm through the hole in the dark imp’s torso.

Left punch, right hook. POW! POW! Right, left, uppercut. POW! POW! The Marine cleaved and carved his way through the crowd, collecting ammo and HEALTH from his fallen victims. A plasma soldier kneeled to release a heat blast. Charging at it, the Marine grabbed the soldier by the throat and threw it over the edge of the platform, hearing its moaning growls fade as it plummeted.

An elevated burst of rifle fire directed the Marine’s attention up. A squad of soldiers were shooting at him from a ledge that hung over the dock, too high for the Marine to reach. Dodging their fire, he picked up an explosive barrel with his free hand and slung it at them. He watched as the barrel soared almost gracefully through the air before taking careful aim and shooting it with the EMG.

Just as the barrel exploded and the blast thundered throughout the hollow cavern, the Marine felt a rough hack at his back. He turned to find himself face-to-face with a fairly undecomposed zombie, a young former scientist with a bright red fire axe in its hands. This one was not a languid shambler, however. It was alert, and fast. For a zombie. Noting a trio of soldiers approaching from ahead, the Marine kicked the axe zombie into them as he focused power into his fist, his gauntlet crackling with crimson energy. POWW! The Blood Punch tore all four zombies apart as their very blood was boiled within their bodies, sending the axe flying in the air. Expertly catching it by the handle, the Marine hurled it straight at the tank in a possessed engineer, the explosion killing it and another two demons beside it.

The last demon in the dock was a dark imp that hopped high across the suspended walkways, lobbing green and blue fireballs at the Marine. He shot at it with the EMG, but its nimbleness and him dodging its attacks made accurate shots impossible. He switched to the pistol’s alternate mode and sent a quick charged shot in the imp’s direction. He missed, but noticed a burst of electric arcs on the wall where the bullet landed. Tracking his prey, the Marine charged the next shot to full capacity and fired. The bullet struck the railing right beside the imp, releasing a small explosive surge that stopped the imp dead in its tracks. The demon only managed to release a single shriek before another bullet blew its head off.

With the dock cleared, the Marine shouldered his weapon and noticed the digit 1 appear under the Calibrator component in his HUD.

Curious, the Marine brought the Calibrator component up on his Dossier.

[POWER ENGINE]

AVAILABLE CALIBRATION CYCLES – 1

AVAILABLE BOOSTS: AREA SCANNER

AREA SCANNER – STORED: 0, ACTIVE: 1, COST: 1 CYCLE

NOTE: MORE POWER-UPS CAN BE ACQUIRED AND SYNTHESIZED BY FINDING USEFUL ITEMS/ARTIFACTS

The Marine raised his eyebrows in understanding: this Power Engine generated calibration cycles based on his neural performance, and he could later spend these to build “power-ups.” That would come in handy.

Switching off his Dossier, the Marine headed for an adjacent barrack which lead directly to the satellite array. He glanced at the chainsaw zombie’s decapitated corpse as he walked by, wondering why such a weapon was on Mars to begin with. He found it almost ironic. Had it not been unusable from the zombie’s corruption, he might have found it quite-

The doors to the barrack glided open.

Quite advantageous.

Almost as if answering his prayers, on the floor of the barrack was a dead zombie with a clean new chainsaw still embedded in its chest. After the briefest pause, the Marine strode towards it and pulled the chainsaw free.

It was certainly a curious device. The casing was of bright yellow coloration, the bumper spikes were unusually sharp and pronounced, even the teeth appeared viciously blade-like. The logo PAINSAW was printed on the blade and casing in large bold letters. The Marine guessed this was not official industrial equipment.

CHAINSAW ACQUIRED

MUNITION TYPE – BATTERY PACKS

PRIMARY FIRING MODE – SHORT BURST (CONSUMES ONE BATTERY)

SECONDARY FIRING MODE – LONG BURST (CONSUMES AT LEAST ONE BATTERY)

The Marine powered on the chainsaw, feeling a surge of satisfaction as the blade loudly buzzed.

Putting the chainsaw away, the Marine glanced over the barrack for any useful supplies. There was a rack of shotgun shells, a grenade box, and a large white apparatus on the wall, on its front a blue cross and the words HEALTH STATION. It unfolded as the Marine approached, extending a metallic tube with what appeared to be medical gel injectors. His HEALTH at 84, the Marine inserted his arm into the device and watched as the injectors descended onto it, bringing his HEALTH up to 100.

Pulling his arm out of the device, the Marine spotted a familiar holographic face materializing on a display.

“The UAC,” the Spokeswoman proudly exclaimed. “The world is counting on us! How committed are you?”

So this was going to be a regular occurrence. Fantastic.

An exasperated Marine advanced to a large grey room that appeared to be a cargo station, with doors leading to other parts of the Res Ops installation. At the far end was a door marked DISH ACCESS. A yellow holographic display on it read ACCESS DENIED – LEVEL 2 ACCESS ONLY.

<You will require a Level 2 keycard to access the satellite array,> explained the computer as the Marine approached the gate. <There is one located->

Without a second thought the Marine kicked the door off its hinges and had barely stepped across the threshold when an alarm began to ring.

“UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS.” It was the facility’s automated voice system. “SECURITY HAS BEEN ALERTED.”

At once, swells of crimson flame began to manifest around the Marine, and he hurried into the onward chamber before he was swarmed. Equipping his shotgun, he aimed at the soldiers as they began to fire at him. BANG BANG! He sniped them off but they kept coming. BANG BANG! A heat blast hit him, and another, and his ARMOR steadily ticked down. BANG BANG! The chamber was a dead end. It led directly to an airlock but he couldn’t find the control switch amidst the chaos. His ARMOR was gone. BANG BANG! A plasma soldier fell before it could charge another heat blast, but the horde seemed to never end.

?

A green fireball missed the Marine’s head by a hair’s breadth.

Uh oh.

He switched to shrapnel shots. BANG! The dark imp exploded in a cloud of viscera, but not before lobbing a fireball straight at the Marine’s chest. His HEALTH was at 88. BANG! The shot missed, and the Marine grimaced as the demon’s burning claws slashed at his face. Rifle fire struck him in the stomach, and a fire axe hit his neck.

56.

Charging a Blood Punch, the Marine fought for space as the crowd descended upon him in a writhing wave. The punch connected but a possessed engineer got caught in the shockwave, and the explosion pushed him back before he could absorb the fallen demons’ energy.

21.

His Blood Rage violently surging, the Marine raised both fists as crimson bolts arced across his gauntlets. Left, right, left. Imps and soldiers mercilessly fell by his hands one after the other, but their numbers proved too great. He fought as savagely as he could but was overwhelmed by the horde, and a grinning zombie with a chainsaw split his head in two.

When the Marine woke up he found himself back at the barrack, just in time to hear a perky voice chime up.

“Here at the UAC we take pride in-”

The Spokeswoman was cut short by the Marine’s foot smashing her projector. He stomped repeatedly on the device until it was nothing more than a pile of metal and glass fragments rolling on the floor. Once it had been sufficiently pulverized, he moved on to the rack of lockers, effortlessly shredding them apart like tissue paper.

Throwing the torn lockers down, the Marine rushed once more into the cargo station, only to find a pair of drones installing a new door to replace the one he’d destroyed. His anger resurging, he turned to a pair of thick pipes attached to the wall and tore them off, repeatedly smashing them against any available surface he found.

<I’m terribly sorry,> the computer uttered amidst the Marine’s outburst, <but our security systems cannot be overridden. An authorized keycard will be required to access the array. If you wish, I could guide you to one.>

The Marine ceased his assault to breathe deeply, his fists trembling with barely contained rage. After a few moments of quiet seething, his anger abated and he lightly nodded.

<Allow me. Continue to the end of this room and turn right into the service corridor where you will find a small access port. Enter it and…>

The Marine quietly grumbled as he headed to where the computer indicated.

An ageless immortal warrior and he was taking directions from a machine. How quaint.

* * *?

Ruby stepped into the hospital’s administrative deck. The emergency lights kept strobing in regular intervals, washing the corridors in alternating waves of dim red and pitch black.

She adjusted her armor, making sure every part was firmly attached. Helmet on, armor on, EMG locked and loaded. Slow, deep breaths, just like in training.

“Tik tik tik.”

A sound echoed behind her, like claws ticking on the tiles.

In the blink of an eye Ruby turned around. Nothing. The corridor was clear.

“Tik tik tik.”

She swiveled back. The sound had come from behind this time.

“Tik tik tik.”

They were toying with her. She pivoted back and forth, completely exposed and with no idea of the enemy’s position. She heard a growl here, saw a darting shadow there, but couldn’t place any of them.

A whirring sound rose in the distance, and Ruby noticed the lights at the far end of the hallway switch on with a loud snap. The power had been restored.

Someone else made it.

The corridor gradually came into full illumination in large strips, and Ruby prepared herself for a confrontation as the wave of white approached her.

Snap. Snap. SNAP.

Nothing. So far, nothing. Ruby knew the enemy was still out there, and she knew they’d surely attack once they were brought into the light.

SNAP. SNAP. SNAP.

The light over Ruby turned on, revealing an imp not ten meters away. Releasing a fierce screech, the imp pounced at her with claws outstretched. She ducked and rolled out of the way to retaliate with her pistol. With keen marksmanship she shot the creature’s knees and put a final bullet between its eyes, but her gunshots would have revealed her position to anything on the deck. Before the imp hit the ground, Ruby was already running down the hallway at full speed.

She tore past one locked door after the other, determined to reach the VEGA terminal before her pursuers caught up with her. Growls echoed behind her, and when she turned she could see dark shapes dart from around corners.

Ruby reached the door to the networking hub, desperately placing her palm to the access pad.

“Access granted. Hello, Agent Taylor.”

Rushing into the chamber as soon as it opened, she slammed the SEAL DOOR button on the wall beside her. She knew the room had no other exit.

But they didn’t.

Moments after closing, something slammed against the door. Something meaty. Claws scratched the metal as the perpetrator howled in frustration. Ruby heard other imps arrive, and she kneeled with pistol at the ready as still and quiet as possible.

After a few seconds the scratching on the door stopped, and Ruby heard the creatures skulk away with bitter growling.

She wasn’t sure they were gone for good, but she put her pistol down and took a moment to calm her nerves.

Standing up, she approached the VEGA terminal.

The VEGA networking hub was a dim semicircular room with a series of manual input monitors in the center. Only these were illuminated; the room’s walls were completely dark and meant to contrast with projected holographic displays. Ruby read the message presented on the central monitors.

WARNING: DEMONIC INVASION IN PROGRESS

No shit.

Ruby closed the emergency message and established the link to the VEGA network, bringing the primary displays up. The reply was immediate.

<Hello, Agent Taylor. It is good to see you alive and well.>

VEGA spoke softly but just audibly. It seemed he understood Ruby’s situation.

“VEGA. What’s happening?”

<The exact cause of the invasion has not yet been determined, but the entire Mars Base is on high alert. I suspect the detonation of some type of Lazarus Wave is to blame. Most if not all UAC employees will be either zombified or deceased. Might I ask, how did you survive the blast wave?>

Ruby pondered for a moment.

“I…don’t know. I was here in the Hospital, changing floors on an elevator when the attack hit. I heard the screams and the roars but…I don’t know.”

<Would you have happened to use the Hospital’s northwest elevator, to change somewhere between the second and fifth floors?>

“…Yeah. I’d just passed the third floor when the wave hit. I pressed the STOP button and stayed there till everything quieted down.”

<There do exist a number of dead zones within the Mars Base which would, theoretically, shield human beings from a transmitted Lazarus Wave.>

“Are there any more survivors, VEGA?”

<Regretfully, that information is being restricted by Central Command.>

“C-Central Command? Hayden and Pierce? VEGA, what’s going o-?”

<Pardon me, Agent Taylor. I apologize for interrupting but you don’t have much time left. If you wish to survive, please pay close attention to what I’m about to say.>

Ruby gulped. She’d been through her own fair share of firefights and containment breaches but this…she didn’t like this one bit.

<The situation has been classified as a Category Five emergency. As you’re aware, protocol dictates that under event of a Category Five emergency, surviving Command members will have full operational authority over UAC assets. Unfortunately, most of the Base is on lockdown and Command has selected the Terminus ‘Scorched Mars’ policy. Survivors will not be allowed to leave the planet.>

This is bad. Ruby’s mind raced as VEGA continued.

<Fortunately, I can assure you that Command is not yet aware of your survival, and I will not reveal you are alive unless it is explicitly asked of me. Head to the Spaceport. You may use the lockdown to avoid being monitored by Command or even by me. Avoid manned facilities as much as possible and use an emergency escape shuttle to evacuate.>

The Spaceport? The Spaceport is majorly far away! How the hell am I supposed to get there without Command noticing? Without getting killed by demons?

<I can’t tell you any more but I can suggest you head to the Radiology Department. Third floor, room 348. Not far from your position. What you may find there could increase your odds of survival.>

Radiology Department? Wha-why?

<The situation is grim, Agent Taylor. Once you leave this room, I will not be able to help you. I set off an alert on the other side of this floor some time ago. It will allow you to safely exit this hub. After that you will be on your own.>

Ruby nodded. This was no time for panic. She was still alive, still breathing, and if she had a chance to reach the Spaceport and leave the planet, the Spaceport was where she was heading.

“Thank you, VEGA,” she said while turning to leave.

<Good luck, Agent Taylor.>

Sure enough, the deck was clear when Ruby stepped out of the hub, and she could even hear an alarm sounding in the distance. She took one last glance at the VEGA terminal before the door shut behind her.

Should I leave now or check out the Radiology Department first? What the hell could be in there that could help my chances?

With what VEGA had told her, Ruby didn’t fully trust the AI, but he had kept his word: there were no demons out to meet her when the door opened.

She sighed. As she was, she had no chance of reaching the Spaceport by herself. Any help at all, even an old sentry bot, was better than nothing.

This better be worth it, she thought as she headed for a stairway to the third floor.

* * *?

KEYCARD.

The Marine found the keycard at the end of the walkway, hanging on a lanyard from the neck of a zombie’s corpse.

At least what was meant to look like a corpse. Besides those of a typical zombie, the body had no external damage or visible blood, lying all too natural against the wall.

They must think he was really stupid.

Rolling his eyes within his helmet, the Marine casually approached the zombie before standing on one foot and crushing the demon’s skull with the other. The creature growled in alarm the brief moment before its brain spilled on the floor.

The Marine stooped to pick the bloody keycard from the now-corpse’s neck. So much trouble for just a small yellow piece of metal.

Kicking the body aside, the Marine pulled open the maintenance hatch on which it lay. This passage would lead directly back to the cargo station.

Sure enough, the passage ended with a hatch opening downward, and the Marine dropped into the familiar cargo station and its nefarious Level 2 door to the satellite array.

“Access granted,” the automated voice spoke as the door finally opened.

Indignant, he bolted into the dock as soon as it opened. The airlock was there, but where was the control swit-

“Welcome to the UAC Mars Installation,” a perky voice chimed.

No.

“Located along the vast Valles Marineris canyon system-”

The Marine rushed to the projector and smashed it on the wall before the Spokeswoman could utter another word. Why were these projectors everywhere? Did the people of the twenty-second century not use pamphlets anymore?

Calming his breathing, the Marine glanced at a security station neatly tucked against the wall. A familiar looking object caught his eye. Enthusiastically stepping into the station, he crouched to pick up an assault rifle from the corpse of a soldier in white armor.

HEAVY ASSAULT RIFLE ACQUIRED

MUNITION TYPE – BULLETS

SECONDARY FIRING MODE – PRECISION BOLT

NOTE: SCORING HEADSHOT KILL WITH PRECISION BOLT WILL PRODUCE EXPLOSION

Although “heavy assault rifle” was a bit of an understatement; the firearm was more like a light machine gun. Closed-bolt with a box magazine – that vanished when synced to his storage matrix – and a tactical scope mounted on top.

Still, a familiar weapon to the Marine, with a very satisfying weight.

Feeling a quaint idea tickling at the back of his mind, he accessed the storage matrix’s settings and tweaked a few configurations.

Moments later, the ammo box reappeared attached to the rifle. He pulled the bolt and loaded a bullet into the chamber before test-firing a few rounds into the wall.

It felt good to watch the rounds be loaded into the rifle and have their cases expelled out the chamber. The sound was very satisfactory as well.

Not a bad weapon, the Marine thought.

He checked the security station for anything else of value. The gun racks on the wall were completely empty, although there was an armor cuirass tucked away in a corner. Walking over to pick it up, the Marine spotted a small grey box on the floor beside it. Inside was a collection of small spherical objects.

UAC PROXIMITY MINES ACQUIRED

THROW TO ATTACH TO SURFACE – WILL DETONATE UPON DETECTING ENEMY

He nonchalantly raised his eyebrows. New equipment was fine, he just needed to find the airlock switch.

Turning to leave the security station, he spotted the switch on the wall beside the doorway. That explained why he hadn’t found it earlier.

He pressed it and proceeded to the airlock while checking his automap. There was a lift to the satellite control station on the other end of a cargo loading zone, with a considerable number of imps and zombies scurrying about the structures. He’d have to thin their numbers if he wanted to reach the control station. Hearing the airlock hiss open, he switched off the automap and stormed into the loading bay.

The Marine fired at a pair of soldiers standing right outside the airlock. To his surprise, the soldiers fell with just a few rifle rounds.

Not a bad weapon at all.

He turned his attention to the battlefield. It stood on the edge of yawning ravine, with the faulty satellite dish mounted on an adjacent platform. Spanning columns and pipes blocked most available lines of sight, while elevated walkways provided the enemy with advantageous sniping positions.

?

Switching to his shotgun, the Marine leapt onto a walkway while dropping a proximity mine at his feet. A few moments later he heard an explosion accompanied by the unmistakable sound of splashing gore. All too easy.

BANG BANG BANG! The shotgun was perfect for dealing with demons in this labyrinthine environment. Point-blank blasts dealt quickly with foes that pounced from behind corners, while the occasional shrapnel shot was more than enough for those that sniped from a distance.

The Marine sprinted across a walkway approached in both directions by imps. He dropped a mine before spectacularly leaping past the encroaching demons. The mine exploded moments later, turning all the imps to steaming gibs and bringing the walkway loudly down onto the Martian dirt.

With the demon’s numbers comfortably reduced, the Marine advanced to a collection of platforms that led to the station lift, planting a mine behind him for good measure.

This part of the base exterior was still multi-leveled but with large open spaces, more favorable to the Marine. Equipping the heavy assault rifle, he unloaded a hail of bullets unto the demons that blocked his path. Imps, soldiers, and zombies alike were torn apart by .50 caliber full metal jacket rounds.

A dark imp on the platform above threw a green fireball. The Marine dodged it and sniped the demon with the tactical scope. BOOM. Dead. A plasma soldier began to focus a heat blast. BANG. Gone.

Seeing a clear path to the station lift, the Marine ran for the gate when a red shape sprung out from behind a column, and he saw burning fireballs form in its hands.

Pyroimp.

The Marine quickly turned for cover behind a column but not before the demon unleashed a stream of hellfire from its hands, washing the Marine in scorching red flames. His ARMOR ticked down to 31. Worthless scum. It must have warped in during the battle, which explained why it hadn’t shown up in his automap.

He fell back to put distance between himself and the pyroimp. It was a heinous creature; bright red in color with vicious white spikes all over its body. The fireballs it launched at the Marine erupted into pools of flaming fluid that burned on the ground and walls. He did his best to dodge its attacks but was unable to get a clear shot without entering its aggressive line of fire, and after several hits his ARMOR was gone.

Gritting his teeth, he rushed out of cover while strafing around the pyroimp and switching to the shotgun. The speedy creature managed to dodge a direct hit but was faltered by stray buckshot, and just as the Marine pumped the shotgun to reload, two more pyroimps dropped from the rafters and charged hellfire streams. This time however, he had nowhere to find cover, and he took the full strength of both attacks.

He retreated to analyze the situation. Three pyroimps guarding the lift entrance, a few soldiers and normal imps scattered across the structures, 65 HEALTH, and almost no bullets.

First things first. The Marine threw a grenade and shot it in mid-air. The pyroimps were too far apart to be damaged by the explosion but they were faltered by the blast, and the Marine hoped that would buy him a few seconds.

Falling back to the labyrinthine portion of the area, he sighted a rifle soldier, and after faltering it with a few .45 pistol shots he punched a hole in its chest. 6 HEALTH and ten bullets. An imp leaped from behind a column with murderous intent, upon which he swept its legs out from underneath and broke its back on his knee. 5 HEALTH and eight bullets. Hearing the distinct sound of a chainsaw nearby, the Marine rushed towards the sound. He recognized the culprit: it was the same zombie which had killed him earlier. A fully charged Blood Punch reduced it to steaming red smears on the walls. 12 HEALTH, sixteen bullets, and a chainsaw battery.

Adequately restored, the Marine checked to see if any of the pyroimps had followed. Sure enough, one leapt onto the walkway above the Marine. Fully charging the EMG’s secondary, he aimed and pressed the trigger. The surge knocked the demon off the railing, and with impeccable accuracy the Marine blew off the creature’s head as it fell and watched the body tumble into the canyon below. One down.

He spotted another pyroimp drop to ground level and begin charging a fire stream. He stunned it with a quick charged shot before equipping his chainsaw. The spinning metal teeth chewed effortlessly through hide and bone alike, drenching the Marine in a shower of thick blood and gore.

Disgusting.

Fortunately, the Praetor Suit absorbed the deluge and converted it into munitions, yielding a bountiful supply of bullets.

One to go.

With its brethren gone, the last pyroimp assailed the Marine with scorching hatred. It lobbed fireball after fireball, setting large swathes of the bay on fire. Pushed back by the crimson flames, the Marine retreated almost all the way back to the airlock. He stared as the pyroimp came into view: a dark figure emerging from the flames, claws dripping with burning fluid and its teeth bared in animosity.

He considered raising his shotgun, but instead just casually rested it on his shoulders. Continuing forward, the demon screeched as flames erupted from its hands, raising them to attack before a loud beep suddenly interrupted its self-aggrandizing. The pyroimp looked down to find itself stepping on a small metallic sphere with a blinking red light. The Marine might have described the pyroimp’s expression as surprise or dread before the mine detonated and the demon’s innards were splattered across the arena.

The Marine indifferently wiped a glob of flesh off his visor. So predictable.

Stepping between the dwindling flames, the Marine took the lift up to the control station and cycled through the airlock. He passed by empty computer terminals and rooms with blinking servers, blood smearing across the walls and screens. Checking his automap, he noticed an odd icon marked in one of the rooms, one that looked like a boxed lock. He jaunted off the main path to the satellite control station for the icon, finding a large safe with a screen stacked on top of a desk.

<That is a high-grade digital safe,> interjected the computer all of a sudden. <UAC employees use them to store valuable supplies or personal items of significance. With the Praetor Suit, you should be able to hack it. I wouldn’t suggest you manually force it open; you may damage its contents.>

Pressing his palm to the screen, the Marine established a link to the safe’s system. He stood still for a few seconds as he unraveled the safe’s defenses, and soon after the screen turned green and the safe slid open with a loud clang.

The first thing the Marine noticed was the digit under his Calibrator counter tick up to a 3. He had earned a second point earlier after defeating the pyroimps; apparently analytic concentration applied as well. If only he had useful boost schematics to spend them on.

After pulling the safe door open all the way, the second thing he noticed was the blue set of combat armor stored inside. It looked remarkably advanced: a clear outer shell covered the entire suit while glowing lines faintly gleamed on the blue underlayer.

<A prototype Mega Armor. It offers unparalleled protection while simultaneously boosting the wearer’s vitality. Once equipped, it will raise your HEALTH and ARMOR to maximum capacity. Although you can choose to store it now for future use.>

The Marine contemplated for a moment. He currently had 88 HEALTH, and didn’t anticipate any dire threat at the moment. Grabbing the Mega Armor, he moved it into his Suit’s storage.

NEW BOOST SYNTHESIZED – MEGA CHARGE

HEALTH AND ARMOR WILL BE INSTANTLY BOOSTED TO 200 EACH

EFFECTS LAST UNTIL EXHAUSTED BY DAMAGE

FABRICATION COST – 5 CALIBRATION CYCLES

That was more like it. The Marine was about to leave when he noticed one last glint inside the safe. He reached in and pulled out a small figurine of…him.

It looked like a toy, comically disproportionate with a huge head atop a stubby body, but impeccably made nonetheless. Printed from acrylic and resin, it was undoubtedly a miniature model of himself.

As he held the toy a long-forgotten memory flashed in the Marine’s mind. A young boy lying awake under his bed covers at night, a dinosaur toy in one hand and a robot toy in the other. Both figurines glowed faintly in the dark, and the boy quietly engaged in a fictional battle of epic proportions, hoping his father wouldn’t catch him playing again.

But that had been a long time ago, and the Marine quickly forced the memory out of his mind. He was not in his childhood bedroom but in a bloodstained facility on Mars, and the toy he held in his hand was not his. It must have meant something to someone else, someone who was likely now dead. He softly bumped the toy’s hand with his own fist before gently placing it back in the safe. Turning back out the room, he headed for the control station.

He stepped into a semicircular room with a series of terminals in the center and holographic displays on the walls. As he approached, a live feed of Samuel Hayden faded into view on the primary display. On the other side of the screen stood a total replacement cyborg, an imposing yet elegant frame of metal, polymer, and glass. His cybernetic body had a white outer shell with black joints, and no visible features on his face save for an unblinking vertical strip of blue light.

The cyborg lightly chuckled as the Marine entered the room.

“You’ve returned.

The only flesh and blood to walk between dimensions.

I must admit, I had doubts that you would ever wake. Some part of me even hoped you never would.

But to see you standing there, I can’t help but feel certain…admiration. It is a privilege, to be acquainted with one such as yourself.”

The Marine scoffed. He’d dealt with others like this Hayden before. First he would try to command him, then he would try to kill him, and when that failed he would try to negotiate. The Marine despised it when they begged for their lives.

Lastly, he would die.

At the Marine’s feet, the floor panel in the center of the room slid open and out rose a large white cylindrical device. It unlocked to reveal a clear sphere that blazed from within.

“It’s a gift. Take it. It will give you strength, help you on your journey.”

?

The Marine grabbed the transparent sphere, feeling a familiar energy burn inside before crushing it, bracing as scarlet bolts arced across his hand and dissipated into his Suit. The device sank back into the floor and disappeared beneath the sliding panel.

ENERGY OVERLOAD

POWER CAN BE REROUTED TO REPAIR DAMAGED MODULE

The Marine stared at the diagnostic map displayed on his HUD, pondering which subsystem he should repair first. Selecting the Vanguard Bracer, he watched as a blue hexagonal energy shield enveloped his left forearm before culminating in a runic symbol in the palm of his hand, both of which faded away into nothingness.

VANGUARD BRACER RESTORED

INCOMING ATTACKS CAN NOW BE PARRIED

CERTAIN PROJECTILES CAN BE CAUGHT AND RETURNED

Hayden’s image appeared on the display as the white device sunk back into the floor. On the other side of the screen stood a total replacement cyborg, an imposing yet elegant frame of metal, polymer, and glass. His cybernetic body had a white outer shell with black joints, and no visible features on his face save for an unblinking vertical strip of blue light.

“That is pure Argent Energy you’ve just taken into your system. It seems to agree with you. Hmm. I will unlock the remaining Argent Cells in the Base for you.”

Argent. So, they called it Argent. That was the plasma they were extracting on Mars: the Aethereal energy that permeated the Immortal Realms. And there was only one place they could be extracting it from: Hell. There was a Hell portal open on Mars, and the UAC were using it to harvest Hell’s energy.

The audacity.

The stupidity.

Keeping his eyes on Hayden, the Marine stepped over to the terminals and resumed the dish alignment procedure. An image of the moving dish came into view on an adjacent display as the Base’s status report finally loaded. The talking computer recited the figures that appeared on screen.

<61330 UAC members deceased, 81% of the Base is on lockdown, demonic presence throughout the Mars Installation is critical. According to the records, Doctor Hayden, the invasion originated in the Lazarus facility. Approximately 27 minutes ago, a Lazarus Wave was detonated manually by Doctor Olivia Pierce, transforming sixty-four percent of all UAC employees into Possessed. The rest were killed by the wave itself.>

Sixty-four percent conversion? What were these people doing?

That woman, she was responsible for all of this. She had killed everyone in this installation and allowed the demons into this universe.

<All demons contained within the Base, a total of 4926 inmates, have been released from their holding cells. The Lazarus Refractor is operating at full power, weakening the integrity of the space-time continuum around the Argent Fracture and facilitating demonic incursion into our dimension.>

They were capturing demons too? Opening Hellgates and building machines to aid demonic invasion? The Marine struggled to restrain his fury, clenching his hands into fists.

Noticing the Marine’s rage, Hayden interjected.

“I feel I should apologize for what’s happened her, some of my employees took things too far. Olivia was the cause of all this and I believe…YOU…will have to deal with her in time. You may not agree with our research but know this: We did not create the Argent Fracture. It was a serendipitous discovery, a wellspring of infinite potential during a time of crisis on Earth. We simply exploited Hell and its resources because it was in mankind’s best interest to do so. What you see now is the cost of that progress.”

The Marine stared in contempt, but he unclenched his fists. He knew better than anyone that interdimensional rifts didn’t just happen naturally. But if Hayden was speaking the truth, and the UAC hadn’t built the Hell portal, then who did?

He visibly shook his head and crossed his arms. He didn’t trust the cyborg, and even though the computer stated it would help him, it was clear that it operated in Hayden’s service. The Marine suspected there was much more they weren’t telling him.

“I understand you don’t trust me. Considering your position, that is to be expected but I am not your enemy. I want to stop this invasion as much as you do so please, allow us to help you. VEGA has informed me that you and the Praetor Suit have been impaired by the prison tomb you were found in. I am willing to place all UAC assets at your disposal to help you recover your power. We can put an end to this invasion, together.”

The computer interrupted before the Marine could react.

<Excuse me, but a primary control room has been activated in the Argent Facility. Doctor Pierce is hijacking the Argent Tower.>

“On screen, please.”

The display switched from Hayden to a different scene. It was the old woman in some control station, facing towards the camera while standing coldly over the corpses of human workers, some on the floor while others still sat on their chairs. She was inputting commands into a holographic terminal in front of her.

“Authorization: Olivia Pierce Alpha Four, Zero, Two.”

A map of the Mars Base appeared on her display with red circles superimposed on its facilities, which she dragged towards a central location.

“All power rerouted to Argent Energy Tower,” spoke the facility voice.

?

<She has locked me out, Doctor Hayden.>

A diagram of a mechanical tower-like structure came into view, accompanied by a tall digital slider.

“She is trying to tear open the portal between our world and theirs.”

Pierce put her hand to the slider and slowly dragged it to full height, despite the system’s alarms and warning messages.

As the bright red displays finally faded, Pierce looked directly at the camera.

“You could not have saved them, anyway.”

The Marine immediately pulled out his EMG and put a shot between Pierce’s eyes on the display. If she was receiving his image, she made no indication of noticing. She turned around and slowly walked away before the feed cut out and the display switched back to Hayden.

“The system won’t allow anyone but Olivia to override it now. We will have to shut down the Argent Tower manually from the surface. The shortest route to the Argent Facility is through the Foundry, an extension wing of Resource Operations.

Do we have a deal?”

The Marine sighed.

He didn’t wish to cooperate with Hayden at all. If it was up to him, he would reduce the entire planet to dust, Argent energy and Hayden be damned. But he couldn’t. His strength was gone, and he would need Hayden’s assistance if he wanted to stop this invasion.

He nodded.

Deal.

* * *?

Third floor.

Ruby leaned across the doorway and peered in both directions. All clear.

Glancing in all directions and constantly looking over her shoulders, she headed for the Radiology Department.

I don’t get it. Someone deliberately released a Lazarus Wave, something only Command could do, but why? Why would they kill all these people? Weren’t they always going on with that ‘benefit humanity’ stuff?

She pushed these thoughts out of her head and forced herself to focus. She could ask questions later. Now was the time to concen-

“RRAARRGGHH!!”

GOD DAMMIT!

She had turned a corner straight into the path of a Possessed soldier. It roared upon seeing her and raised its rifle to fire.

Ruby quickly put a bullet in its brain but it was too late. Her cover had been blown and she could hear movement near her position. But this time she couldn’t run away. If she was going to find out what was in room 348, it was now or never.

If I run, I might be able to lose them.

Running at full speed across the hospital deck, Ruby kept her eyes peeled for any signs that pointed towards Radiology. A roar echoed from someplace nearby, and she tightened her grip on her pistol.

An imp leapt out from behind a column. POW. Dead. Another dropped from a rafter. POW. Gone. Ruby’s aim was sharp but she did not congratulate herself yet: she knew that where one imp was, more would always follow.

“AARRGGHH!”

A shotgun soldier stood in front of her. Ruby aimed her EMG, lining up the sights with the demon’s head, and-

“MORTAL!”

The soldier’s eyes filled Ruby’s mind with numbing terrors, its voice reverberating deep within her core. She pulled the trigger and missed.

Oh no.

The visions vanished as quickly as they appeared, but long enough for the soldier to fire at Ruby. The buckshot loudly struck her armor and Ruby was pushed back by the force of the impact.

Attempting to recover her composure, she realigned her sights and finally blew the creature’s brains out.

Please, no no no. Not here.

She spotted a sign that read Radiology. She was getting close.

She headed towards the sign and spotted at an imp hanging on the wall, teeth bared and claws burning.

Raising her pistol, she –

-realized the imp wasn’t roaring, it was jeering. It mocked her struggle and resolve to live, its voice whispering terrible things into her ears.

What?

She snapped out of it but not before the imp pounced and slashed at her.

Yelling, she pushed the imp back with a well-placed kick and struck it with her pistol. Knocked to the ground, another strike bashed its head in.

Her neural implant was malfunctioning again. Without it, Ruby was powerless to shield her mind from the demons’ psionic attacks.

That’s why I was here TO BEGIN WITH!

Her armor was holding but it wouldn’t last forever. She needed to shake them off, and fast.

She entered the last lobby that would lead to room 348, only to find it occupied with soldiers and imps.

SON OF A-

Without hesitation Ruby grabbed the nearest zombie, a former worker, and held it in front of her as she picked off the soldiers with her pistol. After several shots her meat shield was falling apart and her pistol ran empty. She threw the zombie with full force at a plasma soldier and loaded another clip.

Reloaded, she circled around the room to dodge the imps’ fireballs as she returned her own fire. Dead, dead, dead. An imp pounced at her. Punch, stomp. Switching to the EMG’s secondary, she fired a fully charged shot at a squad of soldiers huddled close together. The blast tore the very flesh off their bones, and Ruby spotted a grenade drop from one of their belts. She glanced towards the lobby entrance.

She’d taken care of the demons within the lobby but reinforcements were charging down the hallway. With no other options left, she rushed for the grenade and picked it up. She felt a familiar chill creep into her mind as she flicked off the pin, and she knew they were coming for her.

“I WILL EAT YOUR SOUL!”

“YOUR KIND ARE OVER!”

“DIE, MORTAL!”

Ruby’s vision blurred as the demons approached, and she could hear her blood roaring in her ears. Throwing the grenade in their direction, she rolled behind a pillar and covered her ears.

Moments later the grenade exploded and Ruby’s mind went quiet.

Hearing nothing, she peered from behind cover to find the lobby completely empty, piles of steaming gore where the demons had once been.

Clearing her throat, Ruby strode across the room, picking up pistol clips and grenades from fallen soldiers.

Room 348. Medical Imaging?

Her destination was right around the corner. Ruby reloaded her pistol and continued forward.

The room was surprisingly clean. Despite the disarray and scattered items, there were no corpses in the control room. Not even a single drop of blood. She glanced towards the scanner visible through a window. Empty. In fact, Ruby could find nothing out of the ordinary, and certainly nothing that seemed useful.

Why would VEGA tell me to come here?

At that moment she heard a thud nearby. It came from the adjacent computer room.

Ruby inched closer, careful not to step on anything that might make noise. She pressed herself to the wall beside the door panel. It was locked. She quietly inputted her security code, reading herself for a confrontation. Taking a deep breath, she slammed the OPEN button and stormed into the room.

“Wait! Don’t shoot!”

Ruby stared in shock. The man on the other side of her pistol stared in shock, as did the others beside him.

In front of Ruby, hidden in Room 348 on the third floor of the Mars Base Hospital, were five other human survivors.

"Pray not for God's word, but for His silence.

Pray not for God's grace, but for His apathy.

Pray not for God's blessing, but for His abandon.

Above all, fear. Fear His contempt. Fear His disgust. Fear His wrath.

Pray, plead, and beg, with every fiber of your soul, that God's wrath does not find you."

- Book of Corrax, chapter 16



E1M1: Fight Like Hell?

Red. Bright flashing red. A siren loudly blared as the strobing light pierced the darkness.

A glowing crimson mark burned overhead. A flaming sword, crowned by Four Sigils of Ascension, striking down the fires of Hell.

?

Hell.

Hell.

He remembered the violence, the carnage, the chaos. The Black Mountains, the Blood Temple, the world crumbling at his feet and the very sky crashing down on him, trapping him in a dark stone prison.

But that was over.

The Marine was awake, and he was very much alive. His heart beat strong and steady in his chest, his breaths deep and invigorating. He lay bound on his back by thick metal chains, the top of his sarcophagus lifted and his slumber at long last broken.

A new sound drew the Marine’s attention. A harsh guttural groaning coming from his right side, accompanied by the unmistakable smell of putrefied flesh. Things he knew all too well. He turned his head to find a zombified human standing only a few meters away. Its flesh hung off its bones in thick, sloughy folds, a deep gaping hole in its skull where the eyes should have been. The tattered white clothes it wore identified it as a former scientist, not a grave threat but still capable of injuring the chained Marine. With a fresh surge of determination, the Marine tore his right arm free of its restraints and smashed it into the creature’s face, feeling blood roar in his ears as he grabbed the zombie’s head and crushed it against the edge of the coffin.

The Marine tore his remaining arm free as well only to hear the same grotesque groaning continue. There were another three zombies in the room, all facing him and shambling in his direction. In a fraction of a second he leapt at the nearest one and tore its head off its shoulders. Balling his hands into fists he swiftly dispatched another one, quick precise blows crushing its skull and breaking its spine. The last zombie on the other side of the room never saw the Marine leap over the sarcophagus and kick it down, caving in its head with a single furious stomp.

If there were zombies here, there would be other demons as well. Bigger and stronger. The Marine was bare and carried nothing but his now bloody fists, and within his bones he could feel a great weariness. He had slept for too long, his forced repose and whatever enchantments cast upon him having drained his strength. If he was to push on he’d need tools. He needed his armor, and he needed-

A hard irregular object beneath the Marine's foot caught his attention. He looked down to find himself stepping on a green-and-black handgun. The Marine picked it up. It was an old weapon, the metal dull and the plastic grip scratched. There were five bullets in the magazine. Too light and weak to worry anything past small fry, but it was all he had.

Loading the pistol, the Marine walked up to a placard on the wall. It was a simple diagram describing the layout of the outpost he found himself in, a certain Site 03. There was the sarcophagus room, comms room, loading dock, Praetor research room-

There it was. Memorizing the diagram, the Marine turned to the door. It was a simple glass-and-metal barrier, the access pad glowing faintly on the wall beside, but the Marine needed to prove something. With a strong kick the metal bars broke and the reinforced glass went flying. The Marine smirked. So his strength wasn’t entirely gone.

Setting off into the pitch-black corridor, the Marine kept his gaze keen and his weapon ready. He didn’t know the extent of this demonic incursion and needed to take the necessary steps as quickly as possible, but before that he needed his suit. He passed various dim hallways and locked rooms, his eyes constantly darting on the search for any potential threat. Blood splatters stained the walls, occasionally streaking off beneath some door or into some dark recess.

The Marine turned a corner to find a group of zombies huddled along the corridor. Alerted to his presence, the Marine sprung to action.

Seven heads, five bullets.

PEW PEW! Two zombies slumped to the floor, the holes in their heads faintly smoking.

PEW! The bullet entered another’s skull but at a shallow angle, and the creature was still standing. PEW! A second shot finally dropped it.

BANG! The Marine grimaced as buckshot tore his flesh. The zombie at the far end was a former soldier, decked in white body armor and a long shotgun in its hands. But it was not like the other zombies around it; its posture was sharp and focused, its red eyes glowing with knowing malice. As the soldier reloaded its firearm, the Marine took aim.

PEW! But the soldier dodged the shot, rolling out of the way at the very last second and raising its shotgun.

Quick as lightning, the Marine grabbed the nearest zombie by the neck and held it aloft. The soldier fired and the Marine’s meat shield blocked the shot, but it wouldn’t last much longer. The Marine charged as the soldier reloaded his weapon and took aim.

BANG! The zombie’s guts blew out in a sloughy mess. BANG! The legs fell off as its spine was severed. One more shot and the Marine’s meat shield would be done for.

BANG! The zombie crumbled apart in the Marine’s hands, and he was left holding nothing but a bloody head. Close enough to attack, he lobbed the head at the soldier before it could fire again. The soldier faltered as the head struck it, and the Marine shifted his grip on his handgun. He struck the soldier with the pistol butt before finishing it off with a quick uppercut.

Momentarily dropping his guard, the Marine saw the soldier’s shotgun was directly fused with its arm, fleshy tendrils snaking all along the weapon’s casing and components. It was clearly far too corrupted to remove, but surely there would be a suitable replacement nearby. He noted a pistol magazine attached to the soldier’s belt. A piquing idea forming in his mind, the Marine discarded the empty clip from his handgun and focused on the fresh one on the floor.

In the blink of an eye, the clip leapt from the floor to the Marine’s waiting pistol, smoothly sliding in with a satisfying click. The Marine cracked a smile. Some things are never forgotten.

A painful blow to the back shattered the Marine’s moment. He’d forgotten about the last two zombies, who had finally caught up to him. His anger resurging, he tore one’s arm off and struck the creature down with it before kicking in the other’s knee and twisting its head off. As they crumbled into putrid heaps on the floor, thin wisps of scarlet energy rose from the corpses and were absorbed by the Marine, his wounds closing in a faint red glow. The Marine let out a sigh as his vitality was restored.

Turning his sight down the corridor he found he’d arrived at his destination, the object of his search on the other side of a glass-and-steel door. The door slid up as he approached, and he took a moment to admire his most prized possession.

There, embedded within an ancient stone altar, was the Praetor Suit. Nicked and scarred with the marks of a thousand battles, its joints encrusted with countless layers of dried blood and dirt, but still in one piece and seemingly functional. He approached the suit and placed his hand on it.

Madness.

Mind-splitting madness.

Before his eyes passed countless nightmarish visions, each one more terrible than the last.

A masked figure in crimson cloak. A flaming sword. A towering monstrosity born of flesh and metal. The Key Holder becoming one with the Master. The Deagic Council of Three. A golden being of a thousand faces. The Blasphemous One, with four burnt wings and in its head a-

The Marine cleared his mind and forced his eyes to open. Only a few seconds had passed, but to him they felt an eternity. The curse had worn off, and he noticed the small red bulb on the Praetor Suit’s breastplate blinking to life. Electricity sparked across the suit’s exterior as its systems activated, and with a single thrust it broke free from the stone altar, setting loose a cascade of pebbles on the hard floor. Holding its arms out, the suit unfolded in anticipation of its wearer’s arrival. After the briefest pause, the Marine set his pistol down on a nearby monitor and walked up to the suit, placing himself inside. He couldn’t help but feel a wave of warm familiarity wash over him as the armor closed itself around him, its parts sealing shut to leave not the slightest seam behind. The helmet came down over his head as the suit’s neural interface linked with him, and the augmented reality visor came online.

?

…RESTORING SYSTEM…SYSTEM PARTIALLY RESTORED

SEVERAL MODULES ARE DAMAGED AND/OR NON-OPERATIONAL

…COMMENCING REBOOT…

The Marine stared in grim silence. His Praetor Suit was damaged too? With weakened body and disabled equipment, stopping the infernal legions would be much more difficult. A counter come to view on the lower-left corner of his HUD:

ARMOR – 0

HEALTH – 100

A clean bill of health, but that didn’t worry him. With mental commands, he accessed his suit’s directory and brought up his weapon cache. After ages of fighting demons across worlds and realms, he’d accumulated a veritable armory of strange and powerful weapons. Hopefully he could use them.

To his dismay, the cache was unresponsive. The weapon files remained in the directory, but selecting them produced an error message:

ERROR: STORAGE MATRIX HAS BEEN CORRUPTED – REPAIR IS REQUIRED

PRESENT ARSENAL IS CURRENTLY UNAVAILABLE

He couldn’t access his arsenal? This human facility wouldn’t offer more than meager armaments, hardly fit for slaying demonic hordes, and he didn’t have the time or means to repair his Praetor Suit here. How was he supposed to stop the invasion?

Concerned, the Marine ran a system diagnostic and studied the results. Fortunately, the fabrication modules were fully operational, which meant a dependable supply of munitions, armor, and equipment. He’d even be able to construct new tools and incorporate them into his system, if he found the right resources.

But the Vanguard Gauntlet was disabled, the Equipment Launcher was destroyed, the Paragon Shield was gone. The Marine sighed. This complicated matters.

He stared at the pistol still lying on the terminal. He picked it up and stared as thin blue bolts arced from his hand to the weapon, just as its schematics and operation data appeared displayed on his HUD. The suit was scanning the pistol at the molecular level, reverse-engineering it, improving it.

UAC .45 STANDARD-ISSUE HANDGUN ACQUIRED

SYNCHRONIZATION TO AUTOMATIC FEED AND STORAGE MATRIX COMPLETE

MUNITION TYPE – BULLETS

SECONDARY FIRING MODE – RAPID FIRE

A second counter appeared on his HUD’s lower-right corner, displaying his current ammo count and the handgun’s silhouette as a small icon beside it. The Marine blew air out his nose in displeasure. At least he could add new items to his repository, but it didn’t mean much if he couldn’t get his hands on bigger and better tools.

Putting the pistol away for the time being – which seemed to suddenly vanish into thin air – he turned his attention to the monitor he’d placed it on.

DEMONIC INVASION IN PROGRESS

If nothing else, these people were certainly observant. The Marine noticed the date displayed in the screen’s corner: October 2149. Had it been so long already? Or perhaps, so little? He sighed. It didn’t matter. Time didn’t mean what it used to.

Returning to the task at hand, he pressed a button labeled STATUS REPORT and waited for the command for load.

…INITIATING SCAN…SCAN INCOMPLETE

REPORT ERROR

SATELLITE DISH ARRAY: OFFLINE

The Marine wouldn’t be able to determine the cause of the invasion until the array malfunction was corrected, which the network placed at a Resource Operations facility. He traced the position of the faulty satellite dish, downloading the geographic data to his suit’s operating system when an incoming voice comm appeared on the screen.

“Welcome.” It was a robotic voice, deep and resonating. “I’m Dr. Samuel Hayden, I’m the head of this facility. I think we can work together-” And that’s as far as the voice went before the Marine punched the monitor, the screen shattering and the whole terminal crashing loudly against the wall.

The Marine turned back where he came from and set off towards the outpost’s exit. His stride was slightly more confident navigating the dark halls wearing full armor as opposed to nothing at all, and he allowed his posture to relax somewhat.

As he approached an access port he noticed a bloodied figure lying outstretched beneath said door. It was the corpse of a soldier in white armor, its torso cleanly severed by the downward force of the door above it. But what drew the Marine’s attention was the object still clenched in its hands, a long silvery pump-action shotgun. The Marine pried it from the corpse’s fingers and turned it over, admiring its craftsmanship and simple but sturdy design.

DS-117 COMBAT SHOTGUN ACQUIRED

SYNCHRONIZATION TO AUTOMATIC FEED AND STORAGE MATRIX COMPLETE

MUNITION TYPE – SHELLS

SECONDARY FIRING MODE – SHRAPNEL SHOT

The Marine’s brow furrowed in irritation. The Praetor Suit’s reboot clearly reset its system configurations, these HUD notifications intruding on his field of view. Through the suit’s neural interface, he accessed its HUD settings and deactivated notifications for redundant information.

…SAVING CHANGES…CHANGES COMPLETE

The Marine humphed as he stooped to pry the door open, immediately noticing the harsh ardent smell reminiscent of burning sulfur. His shotgun was cocked and ready by the time the nimble figure jumped down from pipes hanging from the ceiling. It was a pathetic creature: brown and hunched, with exposed teeth, smoking claws, and pale spikes protruding from its body. The intention to open its mouth to roar briefly crossed the imp’s brain before it was splattered across the wall by 12-gauge buckshot.

The Marine was about to take off without a second thought before he noticed the shotgun was almost empty, holding only five shells in storage. His anger spiking, the Marine turned to kick the bottom half of the soldier’s corpse to pick up any additional ammo it might have carried. Sure enough three shotgun clips flew out, raising his shell count from five to twenty. The Marine turned to leave with a vein still throbbing in his temple.

He was in the loading dock, a long empty chamber with ramps and doors leading to other parts of the facility, a few red barrels scattered atop pallet jacks. In the center stood a large gaping organic construct, its mouth sparking with glowing red portal and a small crowd of huddled figures prostrated around it. He recognized the scene but had no time for the Gore Nest or the zombies worshipping it, rather sidestepping them to head for the bulkhead door at the far end of the room. It was sealed though, a bright red holographic display reading ACCESS DENIED.

“Demonic presence at unsafe levels,” the facility’s automated voice system announced. “Lockdown in effect.”

The Marine promptly punched the door but it would not open, the thick metal denting but not breaking. His rage surging past its breaking point, he tore off back where the Gore Nest and zombies still kneeled in unholy adoration. With a flying kick he broke the Nest apart and crushed its heart beneath his feet just as he drew his pistol. The zombies fell with single well-placed shots as the dying Gore Nest released a hellish screech, its death cry a call for reinforcement. The Marine had already dispatched all the zombies and had just equipped his shotgun when, in swirls of bright red flame, the swarm of imps and possessed soldiers materialized.

BANG BANG! Two soldiers fell as their chests were reduced to little more than shredded meat. An imp leapt up to the ceiling and hung upside down, a fireball forming in one hand. BANG! The imp fell lifelessly and its fireball dissipated into nothing. Other imps darted across the room, quickly jumping onto walls and lobbing burning fireballs at the Marine, trails of acrid smoke in their wake. The Marine rolled out of their way as he switched to his pistol. PEW PEW PEW! He fired off a flurry of shots in their direction, some missing but a few managing to kill the speedy pests.

A burst of rifle fire struck the Marine’s back, his HEALTH counter dropping to 95. He turned to find a zombieman pointing an assault rifle in his direction, its beady eyes casting a sinister red glare. Eyeing two imps approaching from his backside, the Marine had an idea. He rolled out of the way of the soldier’s attack just as the imps pounced, causing the soldier to shoot the imps instead. With furious screeches the imps turned on the zombieman, clawing and tearing at it just as the soldier himself returned fire.

The Marine left the three to finish each other off when a stream of bright blue spheres hit his chest, spreading waves of searing heat that felt as if penetrating his whole torso. A former soldier in white armor stood behind a support column holding a plasma rifle. The Marine shot at it but it rolled out of the way, dropping down to one knee and raising its weapon as its muzzle began to glow and whir. The Marine attempted to run behind another column when the soldier struck him with a wave of searing heat discharged from its rifle, bringing his HEALTH down to 89.

Snarling in pain and anger, the Marine grabbed a nearby zombie scientist and threw it at the soldier as it prepared to release another heat blast. The zombie hit the soldier just as it pulled the trigger, setting the two on fire. The zombie crumbled into ash and the soldier clawed at itself in desperation, which the Marine finished with a precise shotgun blast.

He was running low on shells. He glanced at a group of zombies as the imps got closer.

The Marine charged as he switched to the .45. PEW PEW! Imp down. Another leapt at the Marine with outstretched claws. PEW PEW PEW! Down and out. The Marine approached the zombies and raised his fists. Left hook, a zombie fell. Right hook, uppercut, the second crumbled as the third one’s head splattered the ceiling. All the while the Marine noted their viscera and energy being absorbed into him, producing fresh munitions just as his HEALTH slowly ticked up. A strong kick sent the last zombie flying at two soldiers, all three exploding in a mess of gore and organs.

The Marine withdrew his restocked shotgun and raised it once more, this time not aiming at any demon but rather at a jack loaded with red barrels. Taking careful aim, he shot the jack and watched as the barrels toppled over and rolled throughout the room. Eyeing the remaining imps and soldiers darting across the chamber, the Marine loaded a shrapnel shot and fired. At once the entire room exploded, bright swells of flame and shards of metal soaring through the air.

When the smoke cleared the Marine stood in an empty room, blood splatters and bits of flesh the only indication that other life had once been present. He checked his HEALTH: 99.

Unacceptable.

He was too slow, his senses dulled by his long rest. He needed to get his strength back, and fast.

“Demonic presence eliminated. Lockdown disengaged.”

The flashing sirens turned green and the red hologram over the exit vanished. Faintly satisfied, the Marine made his way to the exit.

As he passed through the gate a holographic recording appeared in his path, depicting some standing figure in seeming deep thought but he paid it no mind. Passing straight through it, he heard the figure indistinctly start to speak as he entered the access elevator and the doors sealed behind him. There was a touchscreen on the elevator wall, an upward arrow softly pulsing. The pad was stained with bloody handprints from a man’s corpse lying on the floor. He pressed it and immediately afterward a voice comm appeared on the screen.

“I’m willing to take full responsibility for the horrible events of the last twenty-four hours but you must understand…” It was the same droning voice. “Our interest in their world was purely for the betterment of mankind .”

The Marine looked down at the corpse at his feet. A victim of this voice’s “betterment.” The Marine cracked his knuckles in barely contained fury as the voice continued.

“Everything has clearly gotten out of hand now, yes, but it was worth the ri- Please don’t smash the panel.” The Marine smashed the panel, which exploded in a shower of glass and sparks. Moments later, the elevator stopped and the doors opened onto a familiar orange landscape.

* * *?

Freezing cold temperature. Thin dry atmosphere. Reddish-brown dirt. The Marine was on Mars. He stopped a moment to take in the sight: dusty air currents rushed past the windswept terrain as distant towers contrasted darkly against the backlit cloud cover. It was evening, the sun hanging low on the amber Martian sky. A crashed shuttle lay not too far away, its engines still smoking and far too damaged to be of any use.

The Marine neurally signaled his suit to mark the Resource Ops facility on his HUD. Roughly a kilometer away, past some industrial refineries and archaeological excavation sites. He cocked his shotgun and set off across the Martian surface.

The Marine jogged in silence across the otherwise uneventful landscape. The outpost he had just left was built underground, the access elevator descending and sealing shut in an uninteresting metal hatch when he exited. At least for the time being, there seemed to be nothing that demanded the Marine’s attention, and he was fine with that. He allowed himself a few moments of relaxation as he ran at an acceptable pace, even comfortable in the low Martian gravity.

He reached the first of the excavation sites, a small shallow basin spreading out beneath him. Here lied the first signs of civilization since the outpost and shuttle, despite being empty of life itself.

Although to what civilization these belonged to was another question.

Littering the site were clearly man-made objects. Flood lamps, tool boxes, and environment suits were obvious examples, along with the odd human corpse that never seemed too far away. But the very site seemed built for the purpose of unearthing other, more enigmatic artifacts. The Marine jumped down, landing softly despite the imposing height of the ledge he’d just been on.

There were four low stone columns built symmetrically within the basin, constructed in some grand architectural style of ages past. Large engraved symbols glowed faintly on their surfaces, but these weren’t the arcane runes of Hell. The Marine could recognize better than anyone the writing and architecture of the ancient Martian people. Well, Martian beings, for they certainly hadn’t been human.

The columns were built in front of passageways leading deeper into the rusty surface, flood lamps and cables leading into the darkness. The cavern archways were of the same architecture as the columns before them, and the Marine knew the caverns continued deeper below, long abandoned by their original habitants. He noted that the columns and caverns pointed in three of the basin’s cardinal directions, the fourth column in front of an open channel that led south, in the direction of the Res Ops facility.

He headed in that direction. There was no insight the Marine could gleam from these crumbling ruins that he did not already know, and he had more pressing matters to attend to.

After a few minutes the Marine reached a point where the narrow channel split into a junction. Narrow passages spread out on either side, leading to industrial refineries but eventually converging back at Res Ops. The way forward was more direct but was blocked by a metal gate.

ACCESS DENIED, the blue holographic display read. LEVEL 1 ACCESS REQUIRED

give key?, the Marine hopefully input into his suit’s interface.

ERROR: SECURITY BYPASS MODULE OFFL-

A swift punch sent the flimsy metal door flying, and the Marine felt his irritation subside with the loud and satisfying CRUNCH it made as he walked over it.

The narrow channel opened onto a flat stretch of land on which Resource Operations lay. The Marine felt dwarfed by the imposing size of the facility in front of him, which was only part of a larger colony that sprawled across the Martian surface. The base was built on the edge of a great valley, distant cliffs barely visible through the amber haze.

?

His HUD marked the only functional entrance to the facility past some low installations, at the end of an elevated tramway that once crossed a nearby ravine. The Marine could see a few scattered zombies and soldiers leading up to the entrance, and he guessed there were more hidden among the structures. He was stocked on ammo, but this was no time to get ambushed by a crowd.

The Marine dejectedly exhaled. Only one thing to do.

He pulled out his handgun and charged.

Most of the zombies hit the ground long before they had a chance to react. By the time the soldiers noticed the Marine he had already pulled out his shotgun. BANG! Soldier turned to red fleshy paste. BANG! Another fell before it could fire a heat blast. The Marine noticed swells of scarlet flame out of the corner of his eye and prepared to fight the next wave.

A swarm of imps warped in but these were different. Larger, more muscular, and leering wickedly at the Marine. A greater number of spikes extruded from their body, and their skin was a deep black.

When he saw them casting green fireballs in their hands, the Marine wisely decided to run for cover.

The fireballs flamed through the space where the Marine had just been, striking at his heels as he rolled behind a piece of machinery. Those green fireballs were faster than the ones thrown by normal imps, and the Marine guessed they hit harder too. But he couldn’t stay hunkered down. The environment was too open and unsuitable for defense, and imps never stayed put. Steeling himself, he switched to his shotgun and leapt out of cover.

BANG BANG! He dropped two dark imps with cold determination. A squad of soldiers approached on the left, from which the Marine distanced himself to focus on the imps. BANG! He shot another but it was still standing, a blue fireball forming in its hand. The Marine reloaded his shotgun as the imp threw the fireball. He swerved out of the ball’s trajectory but to his surprise it changed direction mid-air and struck him in the arm, his HEALTH dropping to 87. Angered, the Marine finished the imp off with a shotgun blast as the soldiers drew nearer. Having grown frustrated with the monsters and his own lack of combat options, the Marine decided to just run for the entrance.

He left the soldiers behind and dodged the imps’ fireballs as he jumped from ledge to ledge, climbing up to where the tramway led into the Res Ops facility. Despite his efforts he was struck by several fireballs and plasma bolts, his HEALTH dropping to 28 but he wasn’t concerned. There would certainly be medical supplies in the facility, what was crucial was him getting inside.

He made the last jump and climbed up to the tramway. Looking down to see if the imps or soldiers had followed, he didn’t even check if he was alone. All he heard was the whirr of a minigun spinning up, and a flash of red light before a hail of bullets tore him apart and the world went black.

* * *?

The Marine woke up. He stood at the entrance to the channel that led back to the excavation site. Resource Ops loomed ominously in front of him. From his position he could still see zombies and soldiers dispersed across the rusty Martian expanse.

Infuriated, the Marine punched the rock walls beside him. His fists sunk deep into the stone, cracks spreading out and a shower of pebbles tumbling down to the dirt.

He’d been killed. A momentary lapse of judgement had caused him to miss the soldier hidden in the shadows by the facility entrance, and he had paid for that mistake.

Not that he was any worse for the wear. He was in one piece and still had all his tools. His HEALTH was even back at 100.

But that wasn’t the point. There was an invasion here, and it needed to be stopped as quickly as possible. Dying costed time. Precious time that he did not have.

The sound of pebbles striking metal jarred him from his thoughts. There was a small beige box at his feet, hidden almost invisibly besides the dirt and rock. He crouched to open it.

It was a grenade box. Neatly stored inside were five green fragmentation grenades, their silver handles gleaming dimly in the light. The Marine picked one up.

UAC FRAG GRENADE ACQUIRED

IDENTIFIED AS EQUIPMENT – SYNCHRONIZED TO EQUIPMENT MODULE

NOTICE: EQUIPMENT LAUNCHER IS DAMAGED

MANUAL LAUNCH OF SECONDARY ITEMS IS REQUIRED

His equipment launcher was destroyed, but the Marine didn’t care. These frag grenades suited him just fine. He grabbed the rest – which seemed to vanish into thin air – and stared back towards the Res Ops entrance.

The corpses of the demons he’d killed still lay on the Martian dirt, but more had arrived to take their place. The Marine groaned in disgust. Demons were a pest, the only way to eliminate them was to slaughter every last one.

He loaded a shrapnel shot into his shotgun. And that was exactly what he was going to do. He charged.

A mob of zombies blew apart as the shrapnel shot exploded in their midst, sending burning shrapnel tearing through their flesh. The soldiers turned around and roared in aggression, but a second shrapnel shot shut them up. By the time the dark imps warped in, the Marine was ready.

BANG! A dark imp took a shrapnel shot straight in the chest and flew off in eight different directions. BANG! The headless corpse of another tumbled down after a shrapnel shot exploded in its roaring mouth. All the while the Marine constantly strafed to avoid their attacks, being mindful of the fast green fireballs and the homing blue ones.

Eyeing the soldiers approaching from his flank, the Marine strafed in their direction rather than retreating. As some soldiers fell to the dark imps’ fireballs, he took care of the rest. BANG! BANG! BANG! With liberal use of shrapnel shots he swiftly eliminated their ranks. Noting his shells were running low, he ran up to a soldier and swiftly dispatched him with a quick punch. Five shells. A normal imp leapt beside him and slashed at him with burning claws. Punch, six bullets. He climbed the ledges up to where a dark imp was lobbing fireballs at him. Left, right, uppercut. The Marine exulted as his ammo returned and the small health boosts topped his counter to 107.

The second wave of soldiers stormed in from the shadows. In a single move, the Marine withdrew a grenade, coolly flicked the safety mechanism off, and threw it at the crowd.

POW! Half of the soldiers exploded in bits of flesh and guts. The Marine threw a second grenade and climbed towards the entrance. POW! He didn’t see the explosion, but the wet splashes and following silence indicated all the soldiers were dead. He glanced at the last of the dark imps leaping about the structures. With precise shrapnel shots he finished them off and prepared himself for the final enemy hidden by the facility entrance.

The Marine jumped onto the tramway and glanced at the shadowy recess where the tramway ended. There, almost invisibly, stood the hulking figure of a heavy weapons commando. It wore red body armor and carried an enormous minigun in its hands. Its body was grotesquely swollen, however. So much that the grey bodysuit under its red armor had torn in several places, the sleeves having long since fallen off its grossly muscled arms. Its only clearly visible parts where the two red lights that brightly shone from its armor, one in the center of its helmet and the other in its chest.

As soon as the Marine climbed onto the tramway, the commando turned and yelled “ENEMY SIGHTED!” The Marine loaded and fired a shrapnel shot at the soldier. The shot hit but did not falter its target, which remained standing and charged up its minigun.

The Marine ran as the commando started firing. He did his best to dodge its fire but had limited space on the narrow tramway, wincing as the slugs ripped through his body.

Falling back to put some space between himself and the monster, the Marine threw a grenade at it. But it was too low, and the grenade exploded harmlessly on the floor. He grabbed another and threw it higher, but a stray slug hit his arm, and the grenade flew to the side and off the tramway.

With 54 HEALTH left, the Marine crouched behind a cart still parked on the rail. But the bullets kept coming, and the commando was drawing closer.

“YOU WILL NOT ESCAPE!” He heard it shout.

The Marine peered from behind cover to fire a shrapnel shot, only to have a bullet strike his face. He quickly ducked back with 42 HEALTH.

"HELL AWAITS YOU!”

The Marine breathed heavy. He only had one grenade, he was low on ammo, and his luck was running out. He couldn’t die again. Not now. Every moment he wasted was another demon breaking through to this universe. Another chance for Hell to reach Earth.

With gritted teeth, the Marine cocked his shotgun and leapt from cover, charging at the commando.

Taking careful aim, the Marine threw his last grenade at the monster. The grenade bounced some distance away but it was close enough, and the commando faltered by the blast. Taking advantage of the monster’s lapse in aggression, the Marine loaded a shrapnel shot and fired it at the commando’s head. The shot hit its mark but the commando did not fall, its helmet breaking to reveal a bald man with a circle beard and bloody mouth. His red eyes cast an evil, reproachful glare.

The commando spun up its weapon once more, but with no options left the Marine kept charging. The storm of bullets returned, and the Marine couldn’t help but watch as they pierced through his armor and hacked away at his HEALTH.

At that moment the Marine was overwhelmed with rage. A bright, swelling, incendiary surge of rage that seemed to set his blood ablaze.

He was furious.

Furious that he’d been forced to sleep for God-knows-how-long, furious that his strength and powers had been drained, furious that his arsenal was gone and he was forced to stop this invasion with no tools, furious that demons had invaded his universe and placed humanity in danger.

But most of all, he thought as he balled his hand into a fist, he was furious that this commando even existed.

With all his strength, the Marine slammed his fist against the commando’s chest. At once the monster seemed to explode in a fountain of blood, body parts and armor flying in every direction. The minigun it held dropped loudly on the floor, powering down and smoking heavily.

The Marine breathed heavily, his armor covered in blood, standing above a pile of gore that had once been the commando. He took a moment to absorb the monster’s energy and heal his wounds. He stared at his fist which dripped with thick red blood. It seemed to even be smoking from the force of the impact.

As he stared, though, his arm really did set afire, bright scarlet flames reaching from elbow to fingertips. The flames suddenly vanished as quickly as they appeared, and a message appeared on his HUD:

BLOOD RAGE RESTORED – CRITICAL HEALTH WILL BOOST MELEE DAMAGE

BLOOD PUNCH RESTORED – FOCUS POWER INTO PUNCH TO UNLEASH A DEVASTATING BLOW WITH A SECONDARY WAVE ON IMPACT

The Marine’s breathing eased. His heart felt to be beating stronger, the fight must have returned some of his strength. But it wouldn’t help much if he didn’t have-

A glint of silver amidst the gore caught his eye. He stooped and picked up a gleaming black-and-silver pistol from the remains of the commando, far larger than the .45 in his possession. The edges of the barrel were painted a deep red, and on the side he could read a “BFP” etched on the metal. He chuckled as the notification appeared on his HUD:

EMG MARK V PISTOL ACQUIRED

MUNITION TYPE – BULLETS

SECONDARY FIRING MODE – CHARGED SHOT

He weighed the pistol in his hand. It was certainly heavier than the .45. Probably not as strong as he would have preferred, but it would do.

The Marine turned to the smoking chaingun at his feet. It was permeated with throbbing fleshy tissue, too infected to be of use, but its ammo belt seemed functional. The Marine extracted the belt and added it to his storage matrix, grinning when he saw his bullet count rocket from 20 to 200.

With a new weapon and full ammo, the Marine entered the loading bay at the end of the tramway, which led into Resource Ops. There were toolboxes, supply crates, carts parked along the rail, even two medikits lying by the airlock. They were small white boxes with a blue cross on their lids. The Marine crouched and opened one. There were two bottles of translucent blue gel inside, along with application utensils and instructions. The Marine took both bottles in one hand, briefly contemplated, and crushed them. He felt immediate relief as the gels soaked into his suit and were absorbed by his body, raising his HEALTH to 38. He stood and crushed the other medikit with his boot, which brought his HEALTH up to 63.

Even with reduced health, the Marine stepped into the airlock with resolute focus and pressed a glowing pad that read ENTER FACILITY. As he did, a holographic recording of a young woman appeared by the gate.

“Welcome to the Union Aerospace Corporation, also known as the UAC,” she exclaimed in a bright and peppy voice. “Now 221 accident-free days.”

As the gate closed and the airlock cycled, the Marine hoped he wouldn’t have to hear her chirpy voice throughout his journey.


“Despite the destructive effect that Hell’s metaphysics have on ordinary matter and information, the UAC has found and studied the ruins of several mortal civilizations consumed by the Infernal Realm. Some are terrestrial and human (familiar or not) while others are extraterrestrial and literally alien, but the most enigmatic is that of the people of Argent D’Nur, the race of the Argenta. Argent D’Nur was an extraterrestrial kingdom that flourished at an inconclusive point in the past; their remarkably well-preserved relics and remains have been found on planetary bodies clearly native to our universe which were absorbed into Hell. What’s most astonishing – or terrifying – is that the Argenta were undeniably human. A monoculture with little genetic diversity, but normal members of the Homo Sapiens species, bearing striking resemblance to Earth humans of European descent. Indeed, Argent D’Nur is unusually similar to historical European societies of the High Middle Ages. Their most elite warriors, the Night Sentinels, were virtually identical to the famed Knights Templar. Despite their austere civilization, the Argenta were anything but primitive, having developed spaceflight, plasma-powered weaponry, even interdimensional drives, all thanks to a native mastery of sorcery. No evidence of Argenta presence in our Solar System exists, and despite their extensive historical records no conclusive origin to their civilization can be found. The very existence of Argent D’Nur is both one of great intrigue and great concern.”

- UAC Report File ‘Argent D’Nur’ 1/2; dated 2104


E1M4: Extreme Prejudice?

The Marine sprinted past corpses lying in the service corridor leading out of the Foundry as he headed for the Argent Facility. Environmental suits hanging on the walls swayed softly with the air pumping through the atmospheric cyclers.

“Untethered crossdimensional activity is a frequent occurrence outside of the Base, so it is recommended that workers buddy up when journeying onto the Martian surface,” pestered the holographic Spokeswoman.

‘Untethered crossdimensional activity.’ Yeah, such phenomena tended to happen near interdimensional rifts that were intentionally, and foolishly, kept open.

But that wasn’t important. With his Suit’s Resonators back online, he allowed the modulating tones to focus his thoughts and quiet his mind. He moved in sync with the beat, allowing himself to walk along a stable rhythm.

He entered the airlock that led to the surface and waited as the atmosphere cycled and the gravity field decreased.

The airlock opened onto the surface, which was shrouded beneath the haze of a Martian sandstorm. The atmosphere was far too thin for the winds to blow with any semblance of force, but they were picking up a thick veil of brown Martian dust, which reduced the Marine’s visibility to almost nothing.

He sighed and looked at his environment. Above him he could make out the blue glow of an automated hovercraft’s engines as it zoomed off into the hazy distance. Green light poles marked a path to the Marine’s left, presumably towards the proper Facility. And looming overhead roughly a kilometer away was the blazing Argent Tower, the scarlet beam soaring into the Martian sky and focusing into a-

The Marine recoiled as his eyes burned. The image of the pure Argent beam had suddenly seared into his vision and left his eyes stinging. Flashing after-images of red, black, and white danced across his mind. That wasn’t supposed to happen.

As soon as it came the pain vanished, and the Marine stood in wonder as his once murky visual field of brown and orange was replaced by a sharp and netherly one. The surrounding landscape and structures appeared as monochromatic but crystalline reflections of themselves, clearly visible through the storm. Made all the more remarkable by the fact that the Marine still had his eyes closed.

His Clearsight was back. That was most fortunate.

The Marine opened his eyes, losing visibility again in the murky haze of dust and dirt. He closed them and focused, and as the droning of the storm faded the shadowy image of the environment appeared once more. He could not see his HUD, as that was projected directly onto his helmet’s visor, and Clearsight lacked the range and acuity of the Marine’s normal vision, but that didn’t matter.

He stood on a cargo loading dock beneath a pair of buildings on the edge of a deep ravine. The Argent Tower blazed brightly in the distance, the beam focusing into a roiling vortex that swirled overhead. The vortex was already crackling with arcane energy, and considering the storm of dry Martian dust, it probably wouldn’t be long before lightning started striking.

“The Argent Facility contains two energy induction filters that must be disengaged, along with a primary processor we have to shut down. If we don’t cut power off to the Argent Tower within the next fourteen minutes, the energy overload will rip the Fracture wide open.”

The two HUD markers appeared on his left, in the direction that the green light poles guided along a narrow passageway to a low installation. A fleeting red shape darted into the open airlock and vanished.

Green means go.

The Marine leapt over the gap and hurried towards the Facility. His Clearsight marked a curious object lying on the floor beside the Facility entrance.

Fourteen minutes was more than enough time, he thought as he picked the item up.

It was a mining tool. Clearly not a weapon but rather an industrial implement. The Marine could sense willful intent imprinted on the tool; fear, anguish, desperation. Crackling flashes cast shadows from twisted monstrosities whose roars echoed across the hostile caverns, limbs and heads flying off to roll away into dark recesses. The tool’s previous user had survived the initial Lazarus blast, and they’d put up one hell of a fight.

The Marine switched to normal vision to read the message on his HUD.

211-V PLASMA CUTTER ACQUIRED

MUNITION TYPE – PLASMA CELLS

PRIMARY FIRE – SEMIAUTOMATIC SHOT, CHARGE TO BOOST POWER

SECONDARY FIRE – ROTATE CUTTING PLANE BETWEEN HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL

There had been survivors, thought the Marine. He’d expected all the people to have died from exposure to the Lazarus Wave or reanimated as Possessed, but at least one of them survived. Who knows? Maybe they just got lucky. Or unlucky.

He wondered how many had survived the initial attack. He wondered how many of these could survive the demonic infestation and evacuate the planet.

But most importantly, he wondered as he passed through the gate into the Argent Facility, what would Hayden and the computer do about them?

* * *?

I fell through a smothering fog that felt so thick as if crushing me. Dreadful figures rushed by and snapped at me, but I fell out of the fog and landed on a hard surface.

The ground was pitch-black but mottled with abstract ember patterns that beat and spread across its surface. Warm fluid splashed at my feet, and I was glad it was too dark to see what I was standing in.

Indeed, I could scarcely see a thing. Tall spine-like structures punctured through the ground at short intervals, casting me in their shadow. It almost looked like a forest. A wretched wind swept harshly above the spikes, but down at my level this was reduced to a rank miasma that stung my arms and legs. I wondered if the only reason I wasn’t suffocating was because of my upgrades.

A bolt of lightning speared across the wicked sky, and I covered my ears as the peal of thunder shook the world and felt as if splitting my head open, grimacing as my eyes stung with the blinding flash.

‘Hellish’ was the only word that came to mind.

“Colonel, where am I?”

“A long way from home, soldier. I’m tracking you now, but I can’t find any portals near your position.”

A new sound rolled across that hellscape; a low mournful bale that sent shivers down my spine. Hushed chittering echoed from deeper within that forest, and I thought I could see distant eyes glint within that darkness. I wasn’t alone.

“Go. Find shelter, see if you find a way out, and stay moving. Hell devours the indolent.”

I took my bronze dagger firmly in my hand and rushed away from those sounds and into the forest.

* * *?

The tram decelerated as it approached Excavation Mine Seven’s station, and Ruby addressed the team as they grabbed their packs and weapons.

“All right, here’s the plan. This mine will have a control facility located somewhere in it. If we reach it, we can find alternate transport to the Spaceport, so the goal is to get there as quickly and quietly as possible.

Most of the mine is outdoors with a lot of active machinery, so sound transmission won’t be an issue but line of sight will. This place is mostly automated, so I don’t expect high enemy concentration, but stay alert regardless.”

The lieutenant interjected.

“What’s our plan of action if we are attacked?”

“Shoot anything that jumps at you, but our priority is to avoid encounters to begin with. We’re jumping into enemy territory here; we have nowhere to fall back to, so reaching the control facility is critical. And watch your heads. We have armor and med packs, but splattered brains can’t be fixed, and you don’t want to rupture your helmets, right?”

“Yes, Agent.”

“Reeves, do you know your way around this mine?”

“Of course I do.”

“Copy that. You’re up front with me. Find us a route that keeps us as much out of sight as possible. Service corridors, ventilation ducts, anything to avoid surveillance or setting off alarms.

Hiro, I want you on that X-Glass 24/7. Monitor all enemy movement in our vicinity. Anything gets within a hundred meters, you let me know.”

“Gotcha.”

The tram stopped at the station, and with a soft ding the doors slid open. The station was empty.

“…Deep breaths. Stay cool. Remember, we’re a team. The only way we make it out is together.”

Ruby clenched her pulse rifle and flicked off the safety.

“Hiro, we good to go?”

The gunslinger synced his helmet to the scope of his vortex rifle, using its x-ray feature to scan for hidden enemies.

“Coast is clear.”

“…Move out.”

* * *?

The interior of the Argent Facility was completely dark, with only the odd sparking wire casting a faint light, but the Marine could navigate just fine thanks to his Clearsight. Littered appliances, dust contamination from the faulty airlock, and a circle of bloody headless skeletons hanging by ropes of sinew above a pool of gore, illuminated by the fiery pentagrammic sigil on the floor below. Nothing out of the ordinary.

“…AAAAAAAAA…”

What in the bloody nine circles was that?

“…AAAAAAAAA…”

Was that…screaming? It sounded like a man’s yell, not in pain or terror but…abandon? And it wasn’t stopping either. Whoever or whatever was making that sound did so without stopping to catch their breath. Most peculiar.

The sound grew louder as the Marine headed towards the first induction filter. The exit airlock was damaged, with only the malfunctioning exterior gate shut to separate the interior of the installation from the poisonous Martian environment. Whatever was making that sound was precisely on the other side. The Marine dug his hands into the faulty gate and pried it open, briefly catching sight of a headless corpse with two flaming skulls in its aloft hands before the screaming entity exploded in the Marine’s face, throwing him to the ground with the force of the blast. 86 HEALTH.

Those weren’t supposed to be here.

A sulky Marine picked himself up and rushed into the sandstorm as the soft tones produced by his Resonators intensified into warbling riffs. His plasma cutter’s blue aiming lasers swept through the dust and settled on the lesser demons alerted to the Marine’s presence. POW POW! POW! POW! POW! The imps and soldiers standing outside were swiftly decapitated by precise plasma pulses. Thanks to his Clearsight, he could shoot perfectly fine even through the thick dust, the demons appearing as bright red silhouettes in the Marine’s otherwise greyscale visual field.

He rushed past the decapitated bodies into a large flat clearing, outside the facility containing the first induction filter. The area was occupied by a crowd of lesser demons which immediately turned onto the Marine as soon as he beheld their red outlines. Despite them being too distant to perceive him at all through the dust, he knew it was because of his Clearsight. If he could psychically sense them, so could they to him.

Switching back to normal sight, the Marine paid close attention to the sounds traveling through the hazy battlefield, even through the thin atmosphere and howling storm. A dark imp screeched behind him, a Possessed soldier vocalized at his ten o’clock, and a flamer zombie fired up its flamethrower straight ahead.

“…AAAAAAAAA…”

First things first.

The Marine quickly switched to his shotgun and fired a shrapnel shot in the direction of the headless kamikaze rapidly approaching from the right. An explosion ensued, followed by the gore of several demons splashing onto the rocky soil. A crackling blue fireball curved through the dust towards the Marine, and he dodged it as he shot the dark imp who’d thrown it. The glow of rolling flames blossomed through the haze up ahead, and the Marine quickly rolled out of the way before the flames fell upon him. He aimed his shotgun towards the source of the fire stream and pulled the trigger, staying clear of the explosion as the flamer zombie perished.

A new sound pierced through the storm to the Marine’s left, a savage hiss that echoed through the clearing, just as he caught sight of a flaming horned skull soaring through the dust towards him. He darted out of the Lost Soul’s path before it mauled him and shot it, watching it crumble and fade away in a flurry of ash and embers.

The Marine spotted the eye glow of several Lost Souls floating near the Facility entrance, and he backed away to restore his HEALTH. He could see up ahead the shadow of a possessed soldier, easy picking. He charged toward it, raised his fists and- BANG! The soldier released a burning blast of buckshot at the Marine. 78 HEALTH. Through the pain and rage, the Marine saw the double-barreled shotgun in the soldier’s hand. Furious, he backed away and fired his plasma cutter, severing the monster’s arms and its grip on the weapon with a single well-placed shot before drawing close again, hoping to bait it to attack again. Sure enough, the disarmed zombie lunged at the Marine to bite him, but he swiftly raised his Bracer and blocked the attack, staggering the zombie before breaking off its exposed arm bone and driving the sharp end through its head. 88 HEALTH, 12 ARMOR.

The Marine activated his Clearsight again. Equipping his assault rifle as the demons once more sensed his presence, the Marine first eliminated the swarm of Lost Souls before they fell upon him. He Rampaged towards a squad of soldiers while shooting at a pack of dark imps, focusing a Blood Punch with his free hand. POWW! With 102 HEALTH and 29 ARMOR, the Marine confidently switched to the rocket launcher. BANG! BANG! BANG! Soldier and imp body parts flew across the clearing in every possible direction.

The hulking shape of a Hell Knight slammed into the ground in front of the Marine. Quickly switching to the phase rifle before another counterproductive event occured, he unloaded a stream of plasmoids unto the Hell Knight before noticing another manifest not far behind. He threw a frag grenade at his feet and fell back to put distance between himself and the demons, dodging their fireballs before the grenade explosion faltered them. Stacked beside the Facility was a pallet of barrels. Most appeared red in his Clearsight, the explosive variety, but a single barrel below them appeared blue. The Marine rushed towards the jack and grabbed the blue barrel, slinging it at the Hell Knights before shooting it. Instead of exploding in flame, the barrel released a powerful discharge of electricity that stopped the demons where they stood, writhing in pain as electricity arced across their bodies. Presumably that barrel had been some kind of industrial capacitor.

The Marine grabbed his rocket launcher and fired his last two rockets at the nearest Hell Knight before the stunning effect wore off. The heavily wounded monster turned to the Marine in pure malice, leaping high into the air and-

KA-POW!

Just in time.

A bolt of scarlet lightning descended from above and struck the soaring Hell Knight, instantly vaporizing it. The energy vortex above the Argent Tower was intensifying, crimson lightning spreading across the dry dust picked up by the windstorm.

He equipped the phase rifle and fired at the last Hell Knight. He charged to release the fatal heat blast when he sensed a lightning bolt about to strike right at his position. Thinking fast, he rushed out of the way before the bolt of Argent lightning fell on him. The storm was getting stronger, and he was entirely covered in metal. He fell back towards the Facility while keeping clear of the Hell Knight’s equally fast fireballs.

The Marine hopped onto a ramp leading into the Facility when he got that same feeling again. Another one was coming, but this time he could use it to his advantage. With the Hell Knight too far for a proximity mine, he switched to his EMG and quick-fired a stun shot. As the Hell Knight writhed in electrified agony, the Marine raised his gaze to the heavens, eyeing the churning vortex of Argent energy. The lightning bolt descended onto the Marine with the speed of a blazing devil, but even faster still he raised his Bracer and skillfully caught the bolt in the palm of his hand. Clenching his fist to contain the raging energy, the Marine turned to the Hell Knight just as the stun effect wore off, releasing the bolt and disintegrating the demon where it stood.

Without stopping to admire his skill, he hurried into the facility and continued into an adjacent room, where his HUD marked a thick pipe-like apparatus attached to the far wall besides a series of monitors. A cylindrical component, presumably the filter itself, jutted out from the machinery.

“We are only temporarily disabling the Tower,” Hayden clarified.

No they weren’t.

“You need to remove each lens indivi-”

Hayden stopped when he heard the sound of breaking glass and metal, product of the Marine promptly and furiously stomping on the protruding filter, the delicate machinery shattering and spilling on the floor.

“Warning. Energy contamination detected,” spoke the automated facility voice.

“Destroying the production of Argent Energy isn’t necessary,” Hayden expressed in a tone that sounded as through gritted teeth, but the Marine wasn’t paying attention.



“Oh Raging One, I beseech thee, calm your righteous fury!” Implored the Deag priest, hunched over in supplication and from a back once broken. “The Elixir is a most treasured resource for Argent D’Nur! It is the source of our great civilization’s power! It sustains our Warpers’ sorceries, feeds our Sentinels’ weapons, fuels our mighty Atlan warriors!”

It had also opened Hellgates directly into Argent D’Nur and corrupted their once honorable people. Led them into temptation. Delivered them into evil.

But he was not in the mood to argue. He stowed his super shotgun onto his back and simply cracked his knuckles.

“Please! You cannot do this!”

He set his eyes on the distant Elixir Foundry as he prepared to charge.

“Nooooo!”

With a booming shockwave he blazed at terrible speed towards the looming infernal tower. He clenched his hand into a fist and…



Hayden was wrong.

It was not only necessary, it was imperative.

* * *?

I moved from behind one tree-like spike to another, constantly looking over my shoulders as I strained to look for potential threats. So far, I hadn’t come across any. Scarlet lightning savagely flashed in the distance while that same foul wind continued to blow. A haunting foghorn-like bellow echoed across the wretched landscape.

“Colonel, you pick anything up yet?”

“Not yet, soldier. You’re literally in the middle of nowhere.”

“What exactly am I looking for?”

“At this point, literally anything. But portals come in a lot of shapes. You remember the teleporters back at the base?”

I…did. I actually remembered: Those creepy blue pods that supposedly broke a person up into all their particles and reassembled them at the other end. UAC had them all over their off-Earth colonies. Rumor was they were built from artifacts found on Mars’s moons way back before…before what?

“Yeah, that’s one example. But Hell’s reality is unstable. It shouldn’t be long before you come across some type of rift.”

Something hissed nearby, and I briefly glimpsed at a gnarled shape before it darted behind cover. It was close.

“Colonel,” I muttered while backing away, “I’m stranded in uncharted territory and the natives aren’t looking too friendly. I don’t know how much longer I can last.”

“Well, you’re a soldier, do something! I’m on the other side of the damn cosmos! There’s only so much I can do!”

Before I could reply, a screeching figure rushed out from behind a spike and charged at me. Its screech was like fingernails on a chalkboard. I reflexively shot it with my missiles and blasted it to oblivion, but other creatures screeched all around me.

“Damn it!”

I extended my spear and sprung into action. I dashed out of one creature’s path and leapt above another one as it charged, but found I had limited space to maneuver in that enclosed forest. I struck a towering spine and winced as something clawed at my back.

“AAAAH!”

I swung my spear at the darkness, lashing blindly hoping to catch something with the bronze tip. I must have hit something, because a slimy tentacle fell to the ground and squirmed violently as the creature retreated. I lobbed volley after volley of homing missiles into the shadows, knowing those would hit their mark, but in that cramped volume I got caught in their blasts. Before long, my overshield turned red.

A serrated tentacle whipped out of the shadows and struck at my chest, and with a surging blast the field surrounding my body dispelled.

My overshield had broken.

“John, look out!”

A chittering beast darted between the spikes towards me. I skewered it with my spear as it leapt, but it remained alive and lashed at me in a flurry of writhing tentacles. I yelled as the razor-sharp appendages cleaved through my chassis. I hoisted the impaled creature into the air and slammed it on the ground, forcing the impaled spear through its body and slicing its head in half. The tentacles finally dropped to the floor.

“…OOOOOOHHHHHH!!”

That foghorn sound. It came from behind, and…above.

I turned and froze in abject terror as I struggled to comprehend what I was looking at.

Towering above the forest of spikes was a hideous and grotesquely emaciated beast the likes of which I could have never imagined even in my wildest nightmares. It was almost like a man, a man with freakishly long arms and legs walking on all fours across the hellscape, stepping impossibly light and delicately for something its size. It was skeletal in appearance, needle-like bones piercing through its thin skin, and its head was horrendously disfigured. A mass of tentacles hung from its face, writhing and squirming in the wind, and even through the darkness I could see the malicious glint from its beady black eyes.

It was staring right at me.

“Run! Get the hell out of there! RUN!”

Colonel Johnson’s voice snapped me out of my terror-induced daze. I saw the lowly beasts slink back into the forest and decided to follow their example. I collapsed my spear and bolted off into the shadows.

* * *?

The team sneaked across the mine hurriedly yet discretely, staying close to the great machines scattered across the rusty Martian surface. Most of them remained in operation, whirring and chugging along despite the certain death of all their operators.

Ruby was tense. She did not feel comfortable out in the open given the crisis, much less with her hearing reduced to nothing. Mars’s thin atmosphere was barely conducive to sound by itself, but the cacophony of industry drowned out all other noise, leaving her and the other survivors to depend on sight alone.

Oddly enough, the mine was completely uninhabited. She had expected light demonic presence, but not even Hiro with his X-Glass had detected even a single living (or unliving) being ever since they set foot in the mine. And this was what concerned Ruby the most.

She forced herself to calm down and focus.

Remember what you said: sound transmission isn’t an issue. If you can’t hear them coming, neither can they.

Besides, if the mine is uninhabited, that just means clear sailing for us. We’re not seeing anything because there’s nothing there. What more do you want, Taylor?

“Agent,” Reeve’s voice buzzed over the radio. “We have to go through that gate.”

Ruby turned to where the engineer pointed. Roughly twenty meters away stood a gate through a tall electrified fence. The gate itself was a force-field checkpoint but was currently deactivated.

“Okay, let’s go.”

The team split in two to keep from drawing attention, as they had been doing since entering the mine. Ruby moved ahead with Reeves, while the other three brought up the rear.

Ruby and Reeves darted quickly through the gate, and the others moved to follow when Ruby noticed the lights on the gate blink to life.

“Run! This gate is about to close!”

The three men broke into a sprint but it was too late. The force field flashed into being between the gate pillars and Rogers bounced hard off the blue beehive barrier.

They were cut off.

“What’s the meaning of this?” The lieutenant yelled as he angrily picked himself off the ground. “What the hell is happening?”

Ruby turned to Reeves, whose body posture suggested bewilderment.

“I don’t…I don’t know. These gates are supposed to stay open during the day to let cargo through. Someone must have reprogrammed it.”

“What the hell does that mean?! Someone MANUALLY shut this gate?!”

Romero put his hand on the lieutenant’s shoulder.

“Nobody’s saying that. Maybe we should fall back and-”

“Get your damn hands off me, you filthy mercen-!”

Ruby had had enough.

“QUIET!!”

Silence immediately followed. Ruby waited a few moments to ensure she had everyone’s attention before continuing.

“This is just a setback. Obviously, we have to find a way to regroup. Reeves, are there other routes to the control facility?”

“Of course. If they go through that building,” she said while pointing to an adjacent installation, “an underground service tunnel will drop them on this side of the fence.”

“Sounds good. You three get to that building. Reeves will guide you through while the two of us continue forward. If you run into any roadblocks, we’ll help you out once we reach the control facility.”

“Sounds like a plan,” Romero remarked while heading in that direction. “Mr. Harrison, stay close.”

“Right behind you, kiddo.”

Rogers remained at the gate.

“Lieutenant, you have the comm. I trust those two to you. Get them back safe. All of you. If we don’t work together, none of us are getting off this rock.”

The soldier looked on a few more moments before nodding in agreement.

“Copy that,” he said before falling back to catch up with the others.

“I want constant reports!” Ruby called out at the lieutenant.

“Yes, Agent!”

“Amanda, let’s go.”

Ruby let the engineer take the lead before discretely switching her radio to a private channel.

“Hiro, you copy?”

“Taylor, what’s wrong?”

“This is a private channel. Listen, I want you to keep an eye on Rogers. Do as he says, but let me know if starts acting strange.”

“You think he’s turning?”

“It might be just the stress, but the situation isn’t a favorable one. Especially not for him.”

“What should I do in case…you know?”

“Let’s hope it doesn’t get to that.”

* * *?

The Marine strutted across a walkway leading towards the second induction filter, keeping sight and foresight keen for stray lightning bolts. His senses were sharp but not omniscient, and Hell had the tendency to make things unclear. Reaching the gate to the filter facility, he instead turned left onto a path leading across a precipitous rocky ledge. Staying clear of the cliff’s edge, he walked up to the object of his interest: a runestone suspended a few centimeters off the ground. This one appeared as liquid cast into solid form, a thick black fluid viscously bubbling and steaming, with an inscribed crimson sigil glowing in its center. He recognized the symbol.

The Marine warily touched the rune, feeling the “stone’s” distinct warmness and noticing its surface ripple with the contact.

RUNE ACQUIRED – BOILING BLOOD

DAMAGE TAKEN WILL BE RECIPROCATED BACK UNTO THE WORLD

The Marine equipped the rune, feeling the familiar symbol flash in his mind. Runecraft wasn’t his specialty though, and he knew he couldn’t sustain too many runes simultaneously, especially in his weakened state.

The runestone floated beside a cargo crate with a dead soldier reclined on it, the remains of their head scattered behind them from a self-inflicted gunshot, but the Marine stared at the culprit weapon still clenched in their hands, an old break-action double barreled shotgun.

…old hands reached for the fireplace mantle…

…grabbed the firearm, reminder of lives saved and lives lost…

…gently passed it to his own…

“…fight evil, wherever and however it may appear…”

…a gift, a promise, a curse…

That’s not important, the Marine thought as he forced himself to focus. His own super shotgun had been a tool of unparalleled destructive power, before which this one could never compare. However, with his stored arsenal inaccessible, he might as well just take it.

SUPER SHOTGUN ACQUIRED

MUNITION TYPE – SHELLS

PRIMARY FIRE – PIERCING BUCKSHOT BLAST

SECONDARY FIRE – EXPLOSIVE SLUG

Well, at least until he could recover the one in his storage matrix, this one would have to do.

…He still had his own super shotgun, right?

Walking towards the facility gate as he brought up his Suit’s directory, the Marine searched for the firearm in his weapon cache.

ERROR: NO RESULTS FOUND

The Marine made no physical reaction as he entered the empty installation, a spacious multi-tiered installation cast in the blue glow of tall coolant tanks. He merely breathed in, loaded two shells into his new weapon, and waited for the demons to warp in.

?

He threw a grenade to his left, lightly tossed a proximity mine behind him, and launched another grenade high into the air in front. A squad of soldiers apparated in but promptly disappeared in a surge of flame and gibs as the first grenade exploded at their feet. Another flamer zombie manifested behind the Marine but exploded as it stepped onto the mine, and he simply charged towards where the next demon was going to appear at.

He threw a grenade to his left, lightly tossed a proximity mine behind him, and launched another grenade high into the air in front. A squad of soldiers apparated in but promptly disappeared in a surge of flame and gibs as the first grenade exploded at their feet. Another flamer zombie manifested behind the Marine but exploded as it stepped onto the mine, and he strafed out of the firing path of the coilgun soldier that had just manifested. Rampaging towards the zombie, he blocked the bolt with his Bracer before raising his super shotgun and turning the demon into fine red paste. The spent shells twirled through the air as the Marine turned to where another Hell Knight had just warped in. The slugs struck the tall coolant tanks, and the Marine noticed cracks appear on the glassy surface as a fresh wave of Hellish beasts warped into the room. Two of them made high squealing noise, much to the Marine’s displeasure.

He switched to his rocket launcher and Rampaged with furious determination towards the Hell Knight. He rammed through the brick red boar-like demons and fired a rocket at the Hell Knight, missing but managing to catch it in the blast. The demon charged at him and the Slayer rushed back to maintain his distance just as a Pinky, a snarling beast the size of a bull, rammed into him with its armored face plate. As his ARMOR dropped to 9, the Marine’s body emanated a crackling wave of crimson energy, and the Pinky stumbled back as the wave burned through its body and scorched parts of its flesh off. Shaking its head to recover its bearings, the beast snarled at the Marine, who’d since leapt over the demon and fired a point-blank shotgun blast at the Pinky’s unarmored flank. The demon crumbled into a pile of singed flesh and bone on the floor, leaving behind only an echoing squeal and the faintest smell of cooked pork.

The Marine moved on and leapt high past the other Pinky and onto the building’s second level. A swarm of Lost Souls floated aimlessly in the upper rafters, turning their flaming eyes towards him as he entered their field of vision. He thinned their numbers with his assault rifle but one of them dodged his fire and snapped at him, crumbling apart as the Marine’s Boiling Blood rune returned the harm done unto it, but not before destroying his ARMOR. Furious, the Marine raised his Bracer to block another incoming Lost Soul. The creature struck the shield surrounding his forearm and dizzily spun for a split second before the Marine dug his fingers into the floating skull’s empty eye sockets and tore it in two. 115 HEALTH, 10 ARMOR.

He sprinted across the building’s second floor, using precision bolts to snipe at demons on the floor below. He downed a dark imp, a rocket zombie, an engineer zombie and three soldiers beside it. A coilgun zombie set its sights on him. He took careful aim and keenly headshot it, the demon exploding and killing two others nearby. He leapt off the second floor and landed hard on an unlucky imp, crushing its skull with his boot before switching back to the rocket launcher. He dodged a plasma soldier’s heat blast, a flamer’s fire stream, a dark imp’s speedy green fireballs, cleaving and punching his way through them to recover ARMOR and munitions. An engineer zombie shambled mindlessly ahead. He grabbed it by its embedded acetylene tank and glanced around for the Hell Knight, finding it tossing fireballs in his direction as it prepared to flank him. The Marine strafed to dodge the fireballs, hearing them tear through the Facility walls far behind. He threw the engineer at the Hell Knight, but it rushed away and the zombie exploded harmlessly against the wall. Something squealed behind the Marine, and he angrily focused a Blood Punch and eviscerated the rushing Pinky with a single blow. He switched to the EMG, brought a charged shot to full capacity, and pulled the trigger. The shot his its mark and the Hell Knight contorted in pain as the electrified plasma surged through its body. The Marine Rampaged towards it, effortlessly ramming through imps and soldiers in his path, reaching the Hell Knight just as the stun wore off. At such close range the demon attempted to slash at him with wicked claws, which he swiftly blocked with his Bracer. He leapt onto the staggered creature, grabbed its head with a vice-like grip, and twisted it off its shoulders.

Glancing at the cracked coolant tank, he switched to his rocket launcher and blasted the tank open. A wave of steaming liquid came down pouring onto the floor of the installation, spreading out across the chamber and catching all demons in their wake. The Marine leapt out of the path of the oncoming wave onto the second floor, watching the creatures freeze solid in agonized poses.

The digit under his Calibrator counter ticked up to eight.

The Marine leapt down onto the first floor’s railings, taking care to avoid the pools of steaming coolant as it ran off into collection drains. It probably wouldn’t hurt him but it might jam up his Suit’s joints.

Kicking down the gate to the filter room, he frowned as Hayden once again pestered over the comm line.

“You must stop, the Hell energy is unusable without the filters!”

The Marine hoped that was the case as he brought his foot down on the whirring apparatus, breaking it entirely off.

“Warning. Energy contamination at critical levels.”

Having destroyed the filter, the Marine proceeded to collect the supplies scattered throughout the room as Hayden continued to badger.

“What you are destroying is more valuable than you can possibly imagine. It is a perfect and unlimited energy...”

A set of electric batteries fully restocked his chainsaw while a large ammo crate brought his other weapons to full capacity. Box of grenades, box of mines. A tactical shield and discarded helmet lay in a corner; the Marine collected them to gain 30 ARMOR.

“…spent decades perfecting the technology. We combined their endless power with our science to…”



“Argent D’Nur has survived for centuries thanks to the blessings of our Wraiths, but now we will prosper, thanks to the Elixir that surges from our enemies! Our strength, our wisdom, our might is indomitable! The dark ones will cower before us!

You will not stop our progress! You, an outsider, a Traveler, have no say in the future of our people!

Now fall back in line with the other prisoners or I will-”

He’d had enough. First his super shotgun had been taken away, then he was chained up with other wayward travelers like a lowly criminal, and now this priest dared disregard his valid concerns and even insult him. He threw his sword down and bitterly approached the priest.

“Wait, what are doing? Stand back! Guards, kill this-

AAAARRRRGGGGHHHH!!”



The Marine rolled his eyes. It was always the progress, always the future, always the hubris for having ‘outwitted’ and ‘mastered’ the powers of Hell. Never the demons that ravaged their worlds and left mountains of innocent corpses. Never the fact that they always played right into the dark ones’ hands, another pawn to be consumed when they outlived their utility.

So much for the future.

There was a curious little robot floating beside a control terminal, carrying a supply crate in tiny suspension brackets.

?

The Marine walked over to it and grabbed the crate’s handle, softly pulling it. It didn’t let go. He poked at the drone’s large unblinking eye, hoping to get some response as he tugged harder. It still wouldn’t release the supply crate.

The Marine swung the attached robot onto the wall, smashing it off but taking care not to damage the crate. He opened it to find a small three-pronged metallic device. He grabbed it and watched as after a few moments of processing, the Praetor Suit integrated it into his left hand.

STUN BOMB ACQUIRED

IDENTIFIED AS EQUIPMENT – SYNCHRONIZED TO EQUIPMENT MODULE

STUN BOMB WILL AUTOMATICALLY RECHARGE THROUGH EQUIPMENT CYCLER

NOTICE: MANUAL LAUNCH OF EQUIPMENT ITEMS IS STILL REQUIRED

His equipment launcher was still damaged. He’d have to repair it soon to free up his left hand during combat.

“…usable and safe! We solved an energy crisis the world had no answer for!

It works! You cannot do this!”

The Marine blew air out his nose in exasperation as he approached a relay terminal besides the destroyed filter. He wouldn’t be able to block Hayden’s transmissions, but perhaps he could drown out his irritating voice.

Moments later, arcane waveforms thrummed through the air once the Marine synced his Suit’s Resonators to the Facility speakers. Smirking, he exited back out through the door and elbowed a frozen dark imp out of sheer spite, listening to the cracking sounds as its body shattered into dark chunks on the floor behind him.

* * *?

“…OOOOOOHHHHHH!!”

The tall monstrous beast mournfully bellowed in the distance, and I peered at it from behind the cover of a gnarled spike.

“Colonel, what the hell is that?”

“Looks like some type of Abherrant, big freakish monsters that haunt the infernal wastelands. They don’t listen to anyone but themselves, and even most demons stay out of their way. You should too. They’re raw manifestations of Hell’s chaos. There’s no telling what they can or might do.”

The creature somberly treaded across the spiked landscape, with seemingly no purpose or agency in mind. I quietly slinked away. Its calm demeanor terrified me, and even though my overshield had returned, my chassis was damaged. I had to leave this cursed place.

It felt as if the tree-spikes were growing thicker, and when I looked up I noticed their tops began to overlap, almost like scales forming a thick canopy.

“Wait wait wait, did you see that?”

I saw something, a flickering light that briefly glimpsed from behind a spine. I stepped back and saw something small and distinctly bright burn close by within the forest. After a moment of hesitation I cautiously ambled towards it.

“Be careful.”

The spines had grown close together and difficult to traverse, and I struggled to move past them. Before long I stepped onto a flat clearing and gaped at the sight before me.

It seemed to be a hideout for what I imagined had once been human soldiers. Mangled and contorted corpses lay on the ground in various degrees of deformity, dressed in some dark military uniform of ages past which appeared oddly familiar. I couldn’t describe it. Crates of equipment lay in disarray throughout the clearing, cast in the fiery yellow glow of a small object which floated about a meter off the ground. I put off analyzing the object to take a closer look at the strewn supplies.

Paper maps, scouting instruments, a bag of simple mechanic tools. Wrenches, saws, hammers and the like. Nothing which appeared modern or even electronic in nature.

How old is this stuff?

There were firearms in the crates. Ancient firearms. Pistols, machine guns, wooden rifles, I even discovered a fossil fuel flamethrower. Entirely metal, no composite materials anywhere.

This is…must be twentieth century.

One of the firearms caught my eye, something that looked like a bulky triple-barreled shotgun.

No way. It’s automatic.

“You know, you might be able to graft that onto your weapons platform.”

“What do you mean, Colonel?”

“Your missile launchers are mounted on a multi-purpose modular platform. Currently those are the only guns on it, but if you find other viable weapons, you could add those and freely switch between. Totally hands-free.”

“Get out of here.”

“Don’t believe me? Grab the other one in the crate and hold them up to your launchers. I’ll take it from there.”

I did as the Colonel said, grabbing another of the bulky firearms and holding them onto my launchers, facing forward. Immediately, the weapon system on my back pulled the guns out of my hands with buzzing noises. The guns spun and whirred in my field of vision, presumably as they were integrated into my system.

“All right, synchronize that…get rid of that…link the trigger to your brain…So, they appear to be miniaturized flak cannons. They fire a short-range burst of burning shrapnel at a decently fast rate. They even shoot incendiary blasts! Slower but pack a bigger punch.

Right, that’s done. Why don’t you try that out?”

The guns had been seamlessly fused into my weapon platforms. I signaled the firing function and watched as white-hot shrapnel loudly shot out the muzzles and sparked on the floor. Remembering Johnson’s comments, I turned towards a space in the clearing and cautiously fired an incendiary blast.

POWW!

“Damn!”

The amber blast surged through the darkness and scorched the rocky ground, leaving dwindling flames in its wake.

Okay, I can make this work. Lastly…

I sent a new signal, and the weapon mounts instantly switched to my default missile launchers. Switch, flak cannons.

Bitchin’.

“Hey Colonel, you said my weapon platform is multi-purpose, right? That means I can add even more guns to the mounts, right?”

“Looks that way. If I’m reading this correctly, it seems you can add… three more weapon systems to your platform.”

Nice. Now, just what exactly is that thing?

I turned to face the cryptic floating object which irradiated the entire arena and took a few tentative steps in its direction.

“Shit!”

There was a corpse immediately underneath it. Why hadn’t I seen it before? It was a creature lying on its back, the object floating above the gaping cavity in its chest. But it didn’t seem like the other beasts I’d previously encounters, it almost looked…human. Two arms, two legs, about the right proportions, but it didn’t wear any uniform and I could clearly see its dreadfully disfigured body, lying in sharp focus under the piercing yellow light.

It’s face- nope. Not looking at its face.

I stood before the object. It was a small, impeccably detailed sculpture, shaped as two spires twirling around each other. Likely made of bone. Narrow grooves and channels on its surface burned with arcane energy.

“You’re not actually going to touch that?”

“I’m lost in the middle of nowhere and I haven’t found anything in the…how long have I been here? This weird thing might be the way out.”

“Sure was for these poor fellows.”

“Couldn’t take the heat. But I think I can.”

I breathed deeply in and slowly reached out, my hand inching towards the object. I clenched my teeth, braced myself…and touched it. Nothing.

“Huh?”

It was hard and rough, warm even, but it didn’t seem to do anything.

“Well, so much for-”

“AAAAAAHHHHHH!”

The object had suddenly erupted in a bright swell of energy, filling the whole clearing with writhing yellow flames. I was suspended in the air, watching helplessly as the power coalesced and streamed into my body with a howling shriek.

“HOLY SHIIIIII-”

And just as suddenly it ended and I fell to the ground, panting in what was now a pitch-black clearing. The luminous object had vanished. My hands phosphoresced with pale yellow flames which soon faded to nothing. I felt…

Great. I felt spectacular. It felt as if there was great power pooled under my skin, just waiting to be released.

“Amazing…John! You’re not going to believe this! Your system is giving off crazy readings! That thing must have been a pyromancy totem! You’re generating combat-grade levels of Argent energy! You can focus it through a psionic channel to release a wave of Hellfire that burns enemies away!”

“Wh-what are you talking about? You mean like a spell?”

“Yes! A spell! Your system can deploy spells!”

“How do I use it?”

“Like this!”

Esoteric words and thoughts flashed through my mind. Before I realized it my hands rose to form a strange gesture in an outward motion, and a wave of vicious flames shot out in front of me at hellish speed. It spread through the clearing and the spine forest beyond, immolating the corpses and abandoned supplies to leave nothing but charred ashes in its wake.

“Siiiiiick.”

* * *?

“The clearance code is eight-three-three-two. Follow that corridor to the end until you find a tunnel leading through the exposed bedrock. Take it all the way to the end, it’ll drop you on the other side of the fence. You won’t be able to open the other door from your side, but we’ll take care of that. Over.”

“Copy. We’re moving. Rogers out.”

Reeves glanced at the patiently waiting Ruby and resumed guiding her through the mine. The other group had safely reached the target building and were currently taking an underground tunnel to their side of the fence, while Ruby and Reeves had reached the primary control facility and were logging onto the system.

So far, no one had yet encountered any enemy forces.

Ruby stayed close to the engineer and kept her pulse rifle ready as Reeves logged onto a terminal. The facility buzzed and hummed with the operation of distant machinery, and faulty ceiling fixtures occasionally sparked onto the blood-streaked floor. Ruby felt skittish.

“It can’t be,” Reeves whispered.

“What is it?”

“The Argent Tower’s energy signatures are through the roof. It’s being overloaded with the energy pools of all four adjacent sectors.”

Ruby peered over the engineer’s shoulder onto the terminal. Indeed, all available monitors were being bombarded with warning messages.

WARNING: CRITICAL SYSTEMS MELTDOWN

CATEGORY THREE INTERDIMENSIONAL BREACH IN T – 8 MINUTES

Ruby knew the only ones who had such high-level clearance to the Argent Tower to do such a thing were Central Command. Hayden and Pierce.

No way. They’ve really gone and done it.

She glanced at another monitor at the edge of the terminal, a scanner for demonic presence throughout the Base. What it depicted astounded her: the main nexus of infestation centered around the Lazarus Labs, undoubtedly the source of the invasion, but thousands of demons from all across Mars were converging towards the Tower and the adjacent filtering facility. Something was drawing them there. Leaving the outer sectors of the Base, such as the mine where the team currently resided, completely uninhabited.

So that’s why. If this keeps up, we just might have a chance of reaching the Spaceport. But what happens when the countdown hits zero?

Ruby tapped the scanner monitor to run a diagnostic on the target region.

What the hell?

The key energy filters at the Argent Facility were being sabotaged. Both induction filters had already been destroyed, leaving only the third and final processor supplying energy to the Tower.

That’ll shut down the Tower for sure, but who’s doing that? Demons wouldn’t do that, they’d do everything to tear open a breach to their dimension. And they wouldn’t need such numbers to do so, they must be trying to stop whoever’s responsible.

Can’t be other survivors, I don’t think many others made it, and they’d never get past the lockdown or infestation. Hayden maybe? No, he’d never sabotage the energy production. Even a unit of assault droids would get taken out quickly, and that arrogant bastard would never do it himself. I bet that shiny prick’s holed up in his bunker.

But who-

…

Nah, couldn’t be.

“No one’s waiting for us at the Spaceport, is there?” Reeves asked in a tone that was more disappointed than afraid, snapping Ruby out of her trance.

Ruby was at a loss for words and debated how to answer before Romero’s transmission gratefully broke the silence.

“Red Team, this is Blue Team! We’ve reached the end of the service tunnel and are staring dead smack at a locked door! How about opening it up for us?”

The engineer gasped and replied to the sudden interruption.

“C-copy! This is Reeves! Opening the gate now!”

“Hiro, you there?” Ruby decisively asked.

“Taylor, still here! What’s up?”

“We’ve reached the control facility! The three of you get your asses over here as fast as you can! Don’t worry about any enemies! Just run!”

“Run? The hell are you talking about? Are we in trouble?”

“Not right now, but that’s the thing! The mine is empty! I’ll explain everything when you get here! Just hurry!”

“We’re moving!”

Ruby turned to Reeves. The engineer was sitting on the floor against the terminal, her HAR lying beside her, clearly lost in thought. Ruby walked towards her but said nothing.

“I never really wanted to come to Mars. I wanted to work in the aerospace industry back on Earth. My father worked on the cruisers arriving at the Houston Spaceport. He often would take me there as a kid, telling me about the adventures the colonists had in the Asteroid Belt or Saturn. Didn’t want to live in the frontier, just liked the ships.

But I…I had a falling out, with my mother. She works at Biodyne. She wanted an office job for me and, I didn’t. We crossed words and…I came to Mars. As far away from Earth and her as possible. Working on a restricted planet owned by a government-contracted megacorp? Never have to see her again. But I…

I didn’t really mean what I said. I was angry, she was angry, I shouldn’t have left things that way. I haven’t spoken to her in twenty years. And now…I don’t think I’ll get to say I’m sorry.”

Ruby remained silent. She kept standing by the terminal facing Reeves but made no reaction.

She then

powered down her pulse rifle and lowered herself besides the engineer, likewise relaxing against the terminal.

The hell am I doing?

“Do you remember the Europa Rebellion back in ‘32?” She casually asked.

“Not really.”

“I was in it. Wide-eyed recruit fresh off the academy, eager to make a quick buck in corporate defense. Worked for Mixom back then. Our platoon sergeant was this decorated Mars vet, I think he served in the Phobos Firewall or something. Carl Johnson was his name.

Biggest asshole in the world, that son of a bitch. Strictest and most demanding bastard you’ve ever met. A hundred rules, follow the book, always with that duty and honor nonsense. Whenever someone broke one of his million rules, he’d force the whole platoon to dig two-cubic-meter ice blocks out with hand tools.”

Ruby laughed as she recalled those days.

“No reason! No reason at all, just chill out in a freezer for a few hours until you can’t feel your hands anymore just to dig up a big chunk of ice and dump it by the warehouse. Before long, we we’re building our very own Giant’s Causeway.”

She briefly chuckled before memories of that night flashed in her mind.

“One night, the rebels attacked out of nowhere. They managed to slip past our sensors and blew our base apart. Fire, and ice. Some sectors had been blown out into the vacuum. They hit our reactor, our hangar, our barracks. Lots of good soldiers died that night.

But there he was. He wasn’t like the other COs who fled to the bunkers. He stayed behind to search for his platoon during the attack. Alone, just his envirosuit and an old pistol. Heh, probably couldn’t fit those brass balls into a power armor. He’d even brought an SOS beacon and called for immediate evac on our position.

…Ten hours, pinned in our destroyed barracks, watching rebel ships swarm overhead. They must have been searching for something because they never came looking for us, but we couldn’t leave. Johnson stood guard all night, telling us it was gonna be all right. Some people had ripped envirosuits and lost limbs to exposure. Others had ruptured tanks and had to share air. Not all of us made it.”

…Where’s this coming from? Why am I telling a stranger my tragic backstory?

“Reinforcements didn’t arrive till morning. Our fighters stormed the skies but the rebels didn’t back down. Determined to fight to the last man. We rushed to the evac ships ducking under enemy fire, and the bastard kept fighting. He stood his ground trying to cover his platoon, making sure every last one made it to safety before he got on board. The last I ever saw of old Johnson was him shooting his pistol into the distance, enemy bolts soaring past, standing on the ice amidst the steam and smoke. Like something out of a movie. Heh, crazy son of a bitch.

If I ever met him again, first thing I’d do is sock him in his chiseled face for all those ice blocks. Second thing I’d do is thank him. Lastly, I’d invite him for a round of beers.

Wonder where he is today.”

…Damn. Must have really needed to get that out of my system.

Reeves had listened closely as the Elite Guard recounted her experiences. She sat quietly for a few moments before responding.

“I’m sorry for my previous behavior, Agent. I know I can be…difficult, and these circumstances are stressful, but that’s no excuse for how I acted. You’ve been nothing but helpful all this time, and you really saved our lives back at the Hospital. If it weren’t for you, I don’t think we could have made it. Most people here at the Base tend to look down on us simple engineers and technicians, but…

Thank you.”

“You’re welcome.”

“…Are they really demons?”

“I’m afraid so.”

“I heard the rumors. Everyone knew Mars contained some interdimensional breach, and that weird things were happening here. The blockade, the industrial-military jurisdiction, Phobos quarantined, Deimos gone. We knew about the monsters, figuring they were just experiments gone wrong. But then we saw Dr. Pierce’s broadcast, the Wave hit, and I saw what it did to people. How they…

The rumors were true. They really do come from the other side.”

Ruby sighed and stood up, relogging onto the terminal.

“I think the living need not concern themselves with ‘the other side’. And we’re still living, aren’t we? Cheer up, Amanda. Fight’s not over yet.”

The engineer’s posture seemed to relax, if only a bit.

“I’m scared. Everything’s happening so quickly and I don’t know what’s going on. It feels like something big’s coming. Something evil.

Something we don’t stand a chance against.”

Ruby stopped typing on the computer to face the engineer.

“Amanda, listen. I’m going get you out of here. You're going to see your mother again, and you'll tell her everything you have to. I promise.”

Reeves said nothing after that, turning to blankly face the wall.

Meanwhile, Ruby continued to track the demonic forces amassing at the Argent Tower. Legions from every direction snaked towards the sector, no doubt swarming to open the gate to their world and stop whoever was trying to shut it down.

CATEGORY THREE INTERDIMENSIONAL BREACH IN T – 4 MINUTES

Good luck, whoever you are.

* * *?

SO MANY DEMONS! WHY WERE THERE SO MANY?!

The Marine leapt from one rooftop to another as he shot rocket after rocket at the charging horde. Imps and Lost Souls chased after him as possessed soldiers fired their weapons from the ground. Thanks to his Rampage, the Marine managed to stay ahead the horde and their attacks but the clock kept ticking. He still had one last filter to shut down. With the dust storm blowing harder than ever he was forced to rely on his Clearsight, which in turn drew the legions advancing onto the Tower towards him instead.

He threw grenades behind while dropping mines at his feet. He reached the rooftop edge and jumped towards a cargo crane as he noticed a Hell Knight far below throwing fireballs at him. He switched to his plasma cutter and charged a shot before firing it at the Hell Knight’s shoulder, slicing the arm off at the bone. Still soaring, the Marine caught onto the crane and pulled it to topple the entire structure on top of the disarmed Hell Knight, shooting his assault rifle while riding the collapsing crane. Forty tons of steel crushed the Hell Knight into a bloody pulp as the Marine leapt off and broke his fall on a zombie's back.

Without stopping, he leapt onto a container suspended from another crane and fired his jump pack to reach another rooftop. A dark imp hot on his trail prepared to throw a homing blue fireball. The Marine jumped into the air as he spun, fleetingly lined the sights for a precision bolt, and blew the demon’s brains out before setting foot on the ground again and continuing without ever slowing down.

The rooftop edge was approaching. The Marine braced, leapt for the next building…and missed. The opposing rooftop was too far away and he fell towards a solid wall. Crashing through concrete and metal alike, the Marine hit the ground running and lobbed grenades within the building as he ran for a stairway headed upwards. A zombie scientist idly stood on the staircase with its back to the Marine. In a split second, the Marine brandished his chainsaw and passed through the zombie with it, bisecting it from skull to groin as he rushed by and collecting its gushing tissues to restock munitions.

Reaching the opposite wall, the Marine kept running and smashed through it, falling past a psionic emitter mounted on the exterior facility wall. Curiously, the emitter was transmitting the frequencies from the Praetor Suit’s Resonators, and he saw the chasing horde roil and thrash as they passed the emitter, forgetting the Marine as they furiously shred the speaker to pieces.

Of course! He had synchronized his Resonators to the Facility relay terminal, and the frequencies his Suit produced were disruptive to demonic minds! The Marine brought up the Suit link and pushed the volume sliders to full capacity.

At once, external emitters throughout the Facility erupted in a discordant cacophony of rancorous noise. It was too rough to be called ‘music.’ Too raw, too aggressive, too heavy, it was more like pure violence made sound.

The horde shrieked and flailed in agony as the pulsing waves hammered through their flesh and bone. Many dispersed into the canyon below or back towards the Tower, still crackling with power, while the rest continued after him.

It was more than enough.

Switching to his combat shotgun, the Marine shred the last few imps and Lost Souls with well-aimed shrapnel shots.

“AAAAAAHHHHHH!”

Fiery waves of Argent energy broad and sharp as swords sliced through the air by the Marine, missing him by a hair’s breadth, and the air churned with dark magic as the Summoner finally appeared. Lesser Hellspawn of the Archdemons; tall and lithe, their Argent wave attacks could raze buildings and bring fighter ships down.

He equipped the rocket launcher and fired a blast at the demon, which wisped away in a stream of flame and appeared again on the rooftop in front of him. He shot another rocket which struck the demon but exploded against the clear shield surrounding its body, leaving the demon lord unharmed.

The Marine did NOT have time for this.

He switched to the plasma rifle and shot a stream of plasmoids at the Summoner to bring down its shield, but this lobbed wave after wave of searing energy at the Marine and forced him backwards before raising its arms and opening a dozen summoning circles around it.

?

BOOM!

Something erupted through the ground at his feet, knocking him off the roof, and he crashed hard through a building before steading himself, cleaving a trough through the Martian soil as he faced his attacker.

It was a metallic Hell Knight, bearing steel plates grafted to its skin, thick robotic legs, and a UAC minigun instead of a right hand.

Not only were these people capturing demons, they were enhancing them as well. His rage surged as he considered the implications.

The Marine rushed away as the cyberknight spun up its minigun. He ducked under a storm of lead attempting to put distance between himself and the cybernetic monstrosity as the Summoner’s wave attacks sliced past him.

He equipped his rocket launcher again and fired a rocket at the cyberknight, which dashed out of its path and rushed after him.

Great, it was faster too.

He held out his left hand and launched a stun bomb at the cyberknight, which winced and groaned as the electricity coursed through its metallic body. The Marine switched back to the rocket launcher. Three rockets hit their mark and blasted large chunks of its armor and flesh off but the monster remained standing. It quickly righted itself and charged at the Marine. He took to the air again and leapt onto a rooftop to gain space.

The cyberknight couldn’t fire its minigun on the move but it could still throw fireballs from its normal hand, fast and keen like tank shells. The Marine caught sight of a long cable hanging from a transport crane as the Summoner rose into the sky and focused crimson lightning throughout the roiling storm, preparing to bombard the area with a lightning barrage. He jumped through the air and caught the cable in his free hand, swinging around to kick the pouncing cyberknight off the roof.

“AAAAAAHHHHHH!”

With a fierce howl the hovering Summoner swung its arms down and unleashed a volley of lightning strikes throughout the Argent Facility, crumbling buildings and vaporizing lesser demons caught in their path. Just in time, the Marine swung off the chain as a bolt of Argent lightning descended on him, raising his Bracer to catch the bolt in his fist. The grounded cyberknight only saw a flash of red light before the Marine brought his crackling fist down on its chest, and the monster exploded in a shower of flesh and metal as the released energy vaporized other nearby demons.

Acting quickly, the Marine spun around on his heel and raised his phase rifle at the suspended Summoner while it remained exposed in the air, successfully striking and weakening its shield with a plasmoid barrage. The demon lord wisped a distance away from the Marine and raised its arms to open more summoning circles, but he shot a rocket before tossing a grenade as he charged towards it. BOOM! BOOM! The demon lord faltered with both blasts as its shield finally broke, and the Marine dropkicked the demon before bringing the buzzing chainsaw across its neck, slicing its shrieking head off and restoring his munitions.

A distant rumbling brought his attention to the Tower. The vortex had grown larger and threatened to erupt as the energy kept accumulating. It was a matter of minutes now, but the horde was still too numerous. He needed something, anything to buy him time. With the demons still after him, the Marine brought up his automap as he scanned the environment for any resource he could use to his advantage.

There! A small fuel depot by the Facility outskirts, but how could he…There were still a number of security gates throughout the installation. Unopened security gates. The Marine had an idea.

He equipped his combat shotgun and headed towards the last energy filter. He stormed through the Facility until the marker appeared in sight, activating his stored Personal Teleporter and launching the circular beacon at the gate.

TELEPORTER BEACON DEPLOYED

The Marine then turned away towards the dispersed security gates. He reached one, a locked blue door guarding a vehicle hangar, and smashed through it. An alarm began to ring and demonic portals appeared around him, but the Marine continued onto the next gate. He crashed through the wall and broke through to another locked gate, this time yellow, and smashed through it as well. Another alarm rung and the horde chasing after the Marine grew even thicker. He shot several shrapnel blasts at the mob behind him to take out the nearest pursuers.

There was one more gate, a red one leading into a hydroponics compound, and he smashed through that one too. The sound of sirens faded behind the Marine, but the horde chasing after him remained deep and dark as night. He headed for the fuel depot.

With such numbers on his trail, the Marine found it difficult to avoid all their attacks. Railgun bolts and fireballs nicked him as rockets exploded at his heels. His ARMOR was gone and his HEALTH ticked worryingly low.

“…AAAAAA…”

This had to be a joke.

Headless kamikaze charged from the direction of the depot straight at him. He fired one shrapnel shot after another to clear them out of his path, staying clear of the explosions as their bodies burst into hellish flames.

Those weren’t even supposed to be here!

The fuel reservoirs loomed up ahead. The Marine soared onto the adjacent building rooftop, ran for the edge, and…

Jumped off.

The horde leapt after him, claws outstretched and teeth bared.

The Marine spun in the air as he fell towards the tank, extending a middle finger at the horde with a small metal ring hanging on it. Too late did the demons notice the grenade arcing down towards the fuel reservoirs. The Marine then vanished in a burst of particles, reappearing on the other side of the Facility where he’d thrown the teleporter beacon.

The explosion flashed on the horizon to rival even the brightness of the blazing Argent Tower.

26 HEALTH. Plenty to spare.

He broke into the installation and hurried towards the final filter, which was mounted in front of a large window to the Argent Tower.

“If stopping our energy production is what you want, then you need only destroy this last filter and Argent Energy will no longer exist in this solar system. We will be back at square one.”

The Marine approached the machine, taking a moment to admire the advanced and ingenious design before facing the Tower, which stood like an evil spear on the horizon. The cutting edge with which the UAC would pierce the heavens and strike down their enemies.



“Our orders were clear. Secure this sector.”

“Sarge, these people are civilians! They’re clean!”

“I SAY WHO’S CLEAN AND WHO ISN’T!”

The year was 2035. He and four other Space Marines had dropped behind insurgent lines aboard Prime Station, Earth’s oldest and largest orbital colony. They’d been scouting an urban sector when they found a group of civilians, tattered and bloodied, holed up in a bombed building. However, their platoon leader, a grizzled sergeant by the name of Mahonin, wasn’t buying it.

“Have you marines forgotten that we are at war at this very moment? At war against an enemy that would like nothing more than to crawl into our bedrooms and slit our throats as we sleep? An enemy that could be hiding in plain sight!”

“So let’s arrest them!” Yelled one of the soldiers, a young man still burdened with idealism. “Let’s cuff them and take them back to base! Have the law sort out who’s friendly and who’s a spy! We don’t have orders to kill innocent people!”

Mahonin stared at the man, his maroon eyes piercing through the soldier’s visor.

“We have orders to secure this sector. By any. Means. Necessary.

We kill them all.

God will sort them out.

But we will send them to Him.”

The captives cowered as they heard those words. The distressed soldier bent over and shook his head.

“I can’t do this. This is wrong.”

The sergeant grabbed the kid by his shoulders and pushed him to the wall.

“THAT WAS A DIRECT ORDER! YOU WILL OBEY A DIRECT ORDER FROM YOUR COMMANDING OFFICER! INSUBORDINATION IS PUNISHABLE BY DEATH! I WILL SHOOT YOU MYSELF, DAMN IT, IF YOU DO NOT COMPLY!”

The sergeant dropped the man and turned to another of the soldiers standing at guard.

“You are soldiers, is that correct?”

“Yes, Sarge,” replied a stern woman’s voice.

The sergeant continued onto the next marine.

“And good soldiers follow orders. Is that correct?”

“Yes, Sarge,” came the man’s reply.

Mahonin walked up to the Marine.

“That means you know, what you have to do. Is that correct?”

Fight evil. Wherever and however it may appear.

The Marine nodded in agreement.

Mahonin’s gaze remained intense but he appeared satisfied. He strode towards the kid, who’d since picked himself off the ground.

“You will follow, any and all orders you receive. Is that correct?”

The young soldier hesitated, but heavily nodded.

“Yes. Sergeant.”

“Good. In formation, marines.”

The civilians exclaimed in terror. The squadron formed a semicircle around them, pinning them against the wall. Mahonin moved behind the squad, making sure all his soldiers followed orders.

The Marine stared at the captives. The sergeant was entirely right. For all they knew, all of them could be insurgent spies. Even the children, wide eyed in their innocence and hiding behind their parents, might have carried sensitive data or equipment across the border. Perhaps even bombs, hidden inside the toy soldier the young boy carried. A young fair-haired boy with imploring hazel eyes.

The Marine sighed. He was going to regret this.

“Ready!”

The soldiers gripped their weapons and so did he. He reached for his back and grabbed his sidearm, an old double-barreled shotgun. The others had likely closed their eyes behind their visors, that way they wouldn’t see their victims’ faces as they died. The Marine didn’t. He needed to see.

“Aim!”



Fire.



The last filter exploded.

Much like Mahonin’s head did.

The Marine remembered it all. He remembered Mahonin’s look of steeled determination fade into ghastly shock as the Marine aimed his shotgun squarely at the sergeant’s face.

The weight of the shotgun, the resistance of the trigger, the recoil of the blast.

Metal, glass, and luminous plasma glinted in the air, hitting the facility window and falling to the floor.

Bone, blood, and brain matter spewed out in an almost aesthetic manner. One of Mahonin’s eyeballs burst into clear fluid, the other flew back with the force of the blast. The remaining bottom half of his head was a sloughy mess of bloody cavities, his exposed tongue flopping limply. The rest landed amongst the rubble and debris, staining the ground a dark red. After a moment of pause, the sergeant’s body fell to its knees and landed face-down with a heavy thud.

The energy beaming from the Argent Tower flickered down and the vortex dissipated into the surrounding atmosphere. The Marine holstered his super shotgun onto his shoulder.

Everyone had been quiet. The other marines slowly lowered their weapons attempting to process what happened. The civilians looked on in horror, disgust, even relief. The young boy was gazing intently at the blood spurting from the stump where the sergeant’s head had once been. He probably was scarred for life.

Tough shit.

He gestured the captives to get the hell out of there. They did, and his fellow marines watched them flee before turning to face him. That was going to be a long night.

“You have no idea what you have just done,” growled Hayden in a low, furious tone.

Wrong again. He knew exactly what he had done now, as he did all those years ago.

<Olivia is still alive. I've detected her life signature in the Argent Tower. She has disengaged one of the accumulators from the tower base and may use it to open a portal manually into Hell The connection to their dimension remains viable. We are at great risk, Doctor Hayden.>

“Where is she now, VEGA?”

<I’m tracking the accumulator. She has passed the Tower midpoint and will reach the peak in ten minutes.>

“Well,” Hayden spoke dejectedly, “that’s it then. There’s nothing else to be done.”

The Marine gauged the distance to the Argent Tower. It was about a kilometer away, with the peak another kilometer above the ground.

Ten minutes to cross two kilometers of densely infested demon territory?

He’d be there in nine.

* * *?

I tramped resolutely yet cautiously across the forest of spines, keeping an eye on the grim Abherrant drearily striding in the distance. I kept my bronze dagger stored at my side, figuring my new spell would be more useful in that claustrophobic environment.

“John, I’m picking something up.”

“What is it, Colonel?”

“A stable channel in the local chaostream. A portal, ten o’clock.”

I headed in that direction, taking clear notice of the shadow that rushed behind a spine.

“Will that take me back to somewhere civilized?”

“Negative, soldier. Hell has…how to put it, tough security. Tall spiked fence all around the edge, keeping the big critters in. Good news for us honest people in our humble universe, bad news for the poor soul who ends up on the other side.

Fortunately for you, old fences tend to have the odd crack, big enough to let the sharp-eyed bug through. And I think I know of one that’ll drop you close to home. That’s your ticket out of here.”

Chittering noises echoed close by, and I readied myself for a confrontation.

“Won’t stop me from meeting other bugs along the way, I suppose?”

“Can’t have it all, soldier. Just be thankful you landed in the shallows with the minnows. The sharks can get rather big out in the open sea.”

What’s with the metaphors?

The figures crawled out of the shadows. They were horrible to look at: slimy tentacles, spikes piercing through their callous hide, a mass of dark gelatinous eyes, black fangs long and sharp like knives. Each one was as big as me.

“Can’t imagine what the sharks are like.”

I was surrounded. I spun my flak cannons in anticipation and held my hands at the ready, which erupted in ghostly yellow flames.

“Come on, come on, come on,” I whispered. “Come and get me, you sons of bitches.”

One of the creatures screeched at me, the sound like claws scratching on glass. I returned the challenge.

“RRRAAAHHH!”

The beast pounced at me. I punched it aside and tore it to shreds with blasts from my flak cannons.

The mob attacked and I released a wave of blazing Hellfire that spread throughout the clearing, noticing the spell consume some of the energy pooled within me. I shot at the beasts as they thrashed in flaming agony. Something roared within the forest. Something big.

I left the dying monsters behind and ran towards my destination.

“Colonel! How much farther to the portal?!”

“Just up ahead! But hurry! It won’t stay open forever!”

“Roger that!”

Montrous beasts leapt at me from the shadows. I ducked under their claws and shot at the ones standing in my way. I could hear the spines behind me crack and break as something smashed through them, and the ground began to quake.

“John!”

There was a great heaving lurch, and something incredibly large soared over me and landed on the ground in front, breaking through the thick and sharp spines like mere twigs. I skidded to a halt as I caught sight of bulging muscles and a gaping maw with countless needle-like teeth before a giant clawed hand slashed at me. I dashed out of the way and used my jump pack to soar over the spines. I hit the monster with a Flame Wave, which roared as the fire engulfed its body.

The energy’s almost gone. This spell must have limited uses.

The creature extended its split jaw and launched a mass of spiked tentacles from its throat. I ducked before they harpooned me and ran between the spines, hearing other tentacles stab into the ground behind me.

“ShitshitSHITSHITSHIT!”

The monster charged through the spines towards me, and I looked back in terror as it raised its hand and-

Eeee…

What the hell is that noise?

BOOM!

A bright flash of blue light descended from above and struck the monster, leaving behind a charred skeleton that crumbled to the floor.

A scarlet warship descended through the cloud cover, brutal and ruthless in presence, with a sound more dreadful than the deepest thunder. It looked similar to the ship I had escaped from.

Standing below it, however, I was truly able to behold its terrible majesty. It must have been at least…three hundred in length, enough to rival some of the UAC’s biggest cruisers. It had an odd hourglass shape that was heavier towards the front and slim in the middle, with several short fin-like wings giving it the form of some marine animal. Its ridged red surface was covered in point-defense cannons, a dozen metallic tentacles writhed from beneath, and a horrific helmed skull blazed from its bow. Definitely not human and definitely not friendly.

I heard the Abherrant bellow in the distance, dreary but with a chilling tone of malevolent rage. The Abherrant began to charge at the ship, moving terrifyingly quick and impossibly quiet despite its size. As I watched, the forest of spines began to quiver, like quills on the back of a…

What am I standing on?

There was a tumultuous maelstrom of arcane energy swirling up ahead in a flat clearing, but the whirlpool seemed to be dissipating away.

That must be the portal! It’s closing!

“Go! Just go!”

I ran for the vortex as fast as I could, hearing the Abherrant roar and the ship prepare to fire again.

“…OOOOOOHHHHHH!!”

Eeee…

“AAAAAAHHHHHH!!”

An explosion shook the world behind me and I passed into the portal.

* * *?

“Are you seeing this?”

“The Argent Tower. It’s…powering down…”

The third and final energy filter had been destroyed, along with Mars’s Argent production, but the Tower was shutting down. An interdimensional breach was avoided, at least for the moment.

Ruby brought up the security feed from the Argent Facility.

“You’re shittin’ me.”

It looked like a warzone. The Facility was charred and devastated, marked with the signs of intense battle. Bullet holes riddled the walls, craters smoked on the ground, building walls were blown out. The fuel depot was gone.

And the corpses!

The facility was littered with the ravaged corpses of countless demons. Zombies, imps, soldiers. Limbs and heads lay strewn about their dismembered bodies, and it seemed every available surface was splattered with thick black blood. As much as Ruby tried, she could not see the body of anything that might have been responsible for such destruction. There was the occasional human corpse but those were workers or lone guards, intact and clearly dead from the initial attack.

Is that…A DAMN DECAPITATED SUMMONER? I know demons will sometimes kill each other, but what the hell could kill a Summoner like that? The one time one of those bastards managed to exfiltrate here, Dr. Hayden himself ordered it nuked from orbit. I can’t even pronounce the type of payload they used.

But something just casually chopped the head off of it?

The feed to the last filter was still functional. She brought it up and rewound the recording to the time of the filter’s destruction.

Ruby pressed her gaze to the monitor, making sure her eyes weren’t deceiving her.

God have mercy.

“Taylor!”

Ruby turned to face the sound. Romero and the others were racing down the wall towards them.

“You made it!”

The three men hurried into the room, and Ruby clapped Rogers on the shoulder.

“Well done, lieutenant. Good to see you all in one piece.”

“Agent. What’s going on?”

“You’re not gonna believe this,” Ruby said as she approached the terminal. “The outer sectors of the Base, including this mine, are completely clear. The enemy has moved away from us and is amassing at the Argent Tower.”

“The Tower was being overloaded less than a minute ago,” Reeves spoke up. “It’s been shut down, but those things are still swarming there.”

“Correct.”

“Wait, what?” Rogers puzzledly asked. “The Tower…overloaded? Shut down? Why? Who the hell would do that?”

“Beats me,” Ruby replied honestly. “But now that the enemy has moved, that buys us some time and opens up other routes. I was considering taking a rover to the Spaceport, directly across the surface to circumvent the infested facilities, but now that those are clear we only have the lockdown to worry about.

There’s a working transport shuttle docked at the Helix Labs, about a click west of here. We’ll cross through the Argent extraction station next door to reach it, then we’ll man that shuttle and fly it straight to the Spaceport!”

“Extraction sites are awfully dangerous, Agent.” Harrison commented in concern. “Raw Argent plasma is exceedingly volatile, not to mention radioactive. Humans are not meant to be present in those facilities, particularly not during emergencies.”

“This whole Base is already a deathtrap, Christopher. Difference is, Argent plasma won’t hunt us down and bite our heads off. Besides, Helix contains the only viable shuttle in the entire sector, and we don’t know if the enemy will stay at the Tower. We have no choice.”

Romero sighed. “How far are we from that Spaceport?”

“Twenty clicks.”

“Twenty clicks of cold and poisonous Martian wasteland.”

Ruby nodded.

“Even unmanned facilities are designed to accommodate people.” Romero added. “If things go south, we’re better off within the Base rather than outside it.”

“Helix is a Level Three restricted installation. Do we have clearance into the labs?” Rogers hesitantly asked.

Ruby grinned.

“You’re looking at her.”

Romero was convinced. “I say we go for it. Ms. Reeves?”

“Works for me.”

“Lieutenant?”

“If you think we can pull it off, let’s do it.”

“Mr. Harrison?”

“Uggh, I’m too old to get cancer from radiation poisoning. Fine.”

“Right on. Ms. Reeves? Take us there.”

“Copy that.”

The team proceeded towards the facility exit, and Ruby began to follow before she slowed to a halt and looked back to face the monitors.

Somewhere out there was a Tower that had been seconds away from tearing a hole into a dimension of unfathomable power and horror, and somewhere out there was someone that had managed to stop it. Someone that was very much alive. Alive and slaughtering every demon in their path.

If it’s really you…I just hope you’re on our side.

“It’s clear that the Argenta settlements discovered in Hell were off-world colonies lost early in their civilization’s history, but some data is certain. All citizens were arduously trained from childhood in the arts of combat and sorcery, essential for defense against the constant danger of demonic assaults that plagued them since their earliest days. The best fighters were conscripted to the armies of Night Sentinels while the best sorcerers became Warpers, both vital not only to the Argenta military but their society as well. Records indicate the Argenta worshipped three beings known as the Wraiths, primal beasts native to their homeworld of Argent D’Nur, extremely powerful and extremely dangerous. The Wraiths were infused with a great elemental energy which was harnessed by the Argenta to fuel their technology and magic. Through blade and ritual, the Argenta fended off the Wraiths’ attacks and pacified their rage while wielding their energy to vanquish all demonic threats. They even used this energy to power giant piloted mechs called Atlans. The Argenta credit the Wraiths with the origin of their homeworld’s biosphere, including the mighty dragon-like Ancestrals and even themselves, but it’s difficult to distinguish fact from myth in this regard. Argent D’Nur was a theological stratocracy where only the strongest warrior was fit to rule as sovereign king or queen, but the wisest Warpers served as spiritual leaders in the Order of the Deag, comprised of three Priests who tended to the Wraiths. The current location and fate of Argent D’Nur remains unknown.”

- UAC Report File ‘Argent D’Nur” 2/2; dated 2104


E1M5: Perdition?

I vaguely remembered what it was like to travel through a teleporter. A flash of blue light, a woosh, and I’d instantly appear on the other side. No fuss, no hassle, easier than taking the elevator.

Traveling through a rift in Hell’s reality was nothing like using a teleporter.

It felt as if my whole body – limbs, innards, brain – was being pulled and stretched simultaneously in a dozen different directions. Up, down, back, forth, in, out, and other directions I couldn’t even imagine, all shifting and twisting at the same time. It wasn’t painful, at least I didn’t associate it with traumatic agony, but I was filled with an endless and just as excruciating sensation of vertigo. As if some…higher thing had attached a bungee cord (a cosmic string?) to my guts and was pulling all of me along through higher dimensions. I couldn’t understand it, much less describe it.

I soared past grand and terrible vistas that seemed as near as they were far. Twisted towers hanging from the fangs of a colossal skull. Great and horrifying shapes fighting each other on gnarled landscapes, crumbling the very mountains in their wake. An oscillating sky of fiery fractals that I too late realized was a single giant eye staring at me. I felt unbelievably tiny and helpless in its gaze, but to my immense disbelief, I safely flew past the eye and put it behind me.

Was it too far away? Or was I not worth the trouble? I would have shuddered had I not been screaming in terror, but I could hardly hear my voice over the deafening sounds of chaos.

“AAAAAAHHHHHH!!”

And just like that it was over. It probably hadn’t lasted so long but to me it felt like forever. I’d landed on some hard surface and squirmed on the ground as I gathered my bearings, focusing on keep my innards inside and trying to stop the world from spinning. I was half-convinced my brain would start dripping out my ears at any moment.

Did I still have innards? …And a brain?

Groaning, I heavily picked myself up as I tried to clear my head. My ears were ringing and my eyes still ached after the sensory assault they’d been subjected to.

Now I understood why the UAC used those creepy robots to explore Hell. My upgrades must be something similar. No human could ever survive this cursed realm, let alone come back.

One did.

Really? Who was it? I…can’t remember.

Wait, robots? Explore…Hell…they sent people here? How did I know that? And who had-

I saw a single eye, a long vertical strip of light at the center of a smooth metallic face, flash into my memory. The face was pitch-black, and the eye was a bright glaring red. My blood instantly turned to ice.

“John, you still operational?”

I gasped. I’d completely forgotten about Colonel Johnson after that experience.

“C-Colonel! Yes! Reporting!”

“Keep your voice down, you idiot! Your systems are scrambled eggs and I’m still trying to get a lock on you! Where in Hell are you?”

Where- WHERE THE DEVIL AM I?!

I anxiously spun around to scan my surroundings for any possible threats but stopped moments later when I spotted the shape in the distance.

?

It was a Tree. A colossal and emaciated Tree that towered high above the horizon. It was tall, and pale. The palest thing I could have ever imagined. It cast no light, but its sheer paleness seemed blinding in the darkness of Hell. My eyes were glued to it, unable to move away from its terrible splendor. It was simultaneously the most beautiful and most horrifying sight I’d ever laid my eyes upon.

And I could hear it speaking to me.

“-dier! Soldier, report! What’s your status?!”

“…u-uh, status!”

With great effort I tore my eyes off the Tree to survey my environment. It was too dark to see clearly – and being in Hell I guessed I would have to get used to that – but besides the Tree could spot nothing else on that unbroken rocky landscape. The sky was a dim turquoise color, almost like a thick haze that diffused what little sickly light shone through. I caught a brief glimpse of majestic forms in the sky behind the Tree, like dark pyramids that cast the landscape in their shadow. It seemed to me like they circled around the Tree, almost as if in adoration. Their mere countenance filled my heart with overwhelming dread. I forced my gaze away from them and stared at the barren ground. This was a place I was not supposed to witness. A place I was not supposed to be in.

Standing in this cursed world, I still had that feeling of corruption – like I was inside a nuclear reactor, being bombarded with radiation that turned by body to ash – but unlike the dark ship and forest of spines I’d escaped from, this new location was eerily empty.

And quiet. I could hear absolutely nothing, not even the faintest whisper of a breeze upon those rocks. The paleness of the Tree came into focus.

This was a place of death.

“Soldier!”

“I’m…I’m on flat terrain! No enemies or landmarks in sight! Only thing I see is a tall white Tree!”

“…My God.”

“Colonel?”

Johnson sighed. “Looks like you have no choice.”

“…This Tree isn’t going to eat me, is it?”

“Not everything in Hell has teeth and claws, soldier. Some things are dangerous in much more subtle ways.”

“Sir?”

“Look, head towards the Tree and start climbing. If you can reach the branchtips, you might be able to make use of the situation. If not…let’s hope you don’t lose yourself.”

* * *?

The Marine blazed across the Martian surface at tremendous speed, raising a thick trail of dust in his wake, racing towards the slender Argent Tower that loomed ahead like a knife against the dark blue of the evening Martian sky.

?

The atmosphere remained hazy but with the energy vortex above the Tower gone, the sandstorm was blowing away. He rushed down a dilapidated highway on which dozens of wrecked transport vehicles lay motionlessly, their passengers still and silent in their seats. The highway leading up to the Tower and its surrounding infrastructure was clear of enemies and the Marine could see why.

The Tower’s whole exterior and base was teeming with the claws and teeth of thousands of demons from all over the planet. The Marine could see Hell Knights and zombies of every kind patrolling the outer platforms while imps and Lost Souls guarded the vertical surfaces. It seemed there was hardly a spot on the twelve-hundred-meter-tall Tower that was not occupied by a demon.

They had planned this. It wouldn’t be long before Pierce reached the Tower peak, and the horde was too thick to make the shorter route of climbing the exterior a viable option. The Marine would have to enter the Tower.

He frowned as he entered a stretch of highway that crossed a deep chasm in the surface, a portion of the bridge crumbled to the canyon below.

Why was the Base built on top of this wretched canyon system?! Better question: why did the Fracture appear here of all places?! WHO CREATED THE DAMN FRACTURE?!

The Marine would have yelled in frustration as he soared over the gap in the bridge, but he didn’t. He couldn’t. He merely leapt over the collapsed portion of the bridge and equipped his rocket launcher as he approached the outermost of the demons’ forces.

But his rage was building; the fire escalated within his blood and the waveforms generated by his Resonators became more intense. If need be, he might be able to go Berserk for the final confrontation.

Three hundred meters to the Tower.

BOOM! BOOM! BOOM! He cleared a path through the horde and rushed through before the flying gibs even landed on the concrete. He dodged and strafed out of the way of a hundred projectiles, fireballs, rail bolts, and rockets. A Hell Knight leapt over the crowd with fire in its claws and fury in its eyes. The Marine threw a stun bomb at the monster and launched two rockets as he charged at it before brandishing his chainsaw and cutting the demon in two. The Hell Knight’s blood and tissues trailed behind him as the Praetor Suit siphoned them to restore munitions.

Two hundred meters to the Tower.

“AAAAAAHHHHHH…”

The Marine switched to his EMG and charged a power shot before releasing it at the ground in front of the headless kamikaze. The charging demon was thrown back by the force of the blast and into a squad of possessed soldiers, exploding and killing them all.

The demons on the lower exterior of the Tower crawled down from its steeled surface and charged at the Marine in a thick black wave of claws and teeth.

One hundred meters.

The Marine put the gun away and held his right hand back as he began focusing power into it. He sped up and Rampaged across the mob, effortlessly breaking through shell and bone as his fist crackled with scarlet energy.

Zero meters.

POWW!

* * *?

ARGENT EXTRACTION SITE 32

WARNING: VOLATILE ARGENT PLASMA PRESENT

ENTRY IS RESTRICTED TO ALL PERSONNEL BELOW LEVEL 2

Ruby warily glanced at the danger signs as the team walked across the extraction site. It was an exterior sector located next to the mine they’d just exited, albeit less spacious with the industrial facilities needed to siphon and transport the effervescent Argent plasma.

Ruby took the lead along with Harrison, confident he would lead the group along a safe route through the hazardous sector, and even though the elderly scientist hadn’t stated it, it was clear he was on edge. And so was she. She knew this part of the Base was clear of demons, but she had never entered an extraction site before, and she was wary of the unfamiliar equipment and machineries. A thin red fog swirled lazily at their feet.

PEW PEW PEW PEW PEW!

In a split second Ruby had spun around and raised her pulse rifle. The engineer was shooting her HAR at a support pillar, the rounds glancing off the thick metal.

“CONTACT!” Rogers shouted in alarm.

The entire group aimed their weapons in alert, except for Harrison who crouched behind the trained personnel, but it was apparent that Reeves was shooting at nothing.

“Reeves!” Rogers yelled. “REEVES! STOP!”

The lieutenant grabbed the engineer’s hand and pried it off the trigger.

“Just what in Hell’s name do you think you’re doing?!”

“Something moved! It hid behind the pillar!”

“We’re in a damn automated sector! Of course something is going to be moving!”

“I know what I saw! It was one of those things, snarling at me!”

“Damn it, Reeves! You said it yourself, this part of the Base is clear of enemies! Get a hold of yourse-!”

“CONTACT!”

Romero dropped to his knees and aimed his vortex rifle, peering through the X-Glass scope. He panned the rifle left and right, but suddenly raised his gaze in a posture suggesting puzzlement.

The lieutenant’s contempt was clear in his voice.

“Are you losing your marbles too, mercenary?”

“Something’s scrambling my X-Glass. The feed’s all distorted.”

Ruby, who’d been silently observing the group’s exchanges, spoke up.

“Let me see your rifle, Hiro.”

The gunslinger passed his weapon to Ruby, who synced her visor to the rifle’s scope. Sure enough, what appeared in her visor was not the transparent monochromatic landscape particular to an X-Glass, but a chaotic field of hectic runes. She forced herself to keep her composure as her blood ran cold.

“Christopher,” she nonchalantly said as she returned the vortex rifle to its owner, “what’s happening here?”

The scientist said nothing.

“Christopher?”

“…I…I…I don’t know.”

The scientist was lying, but Ruby could tell that it was out of fear rather than malice.

Well, whatever it is, it hasn’t attacked yet. There’s no reason why there should still be any demons in this sector, and if we start panicking for no reason, we’ll all die anyway.

“Well,” she said to the group, “I’m thoroughly convinced extraction sites are spooky. But let’s not lose our heads here, all right? We still have a ways to go till Helix, so let’s stay focused and keep moving forward.”

“Agent?” Harrison fearfully spoke up. “Perhaps it might be best if we turned around. Attempt to find another route to the Labs. I’m sure it wouldn’t take so long.”

“This site offers the shortest route to the Labs, Christopher. We continue as planned.”

The scientist said nothing after that but Ruby could tell he was unconvinced. But that didn’t matter. They had to get off the planet as soon as possible.

“And, Amanda? Next time you see something that might be a threat, yell ‘contact’ before you start shooting.”

* * *?

I had reached the base of the pale Tree and had started climbing it. Only once against it could I begin to fathom its size. It was huge, almost like a skyscraper.

How am I ever going to reach the top?

The trunk was not a smooth vertical surface but rather riddled with rough outcrops and deep recesses, which through my jump pack I used to gradually scale the towering Tree.

The Tree.

The Tree.

…could he be demon-kin, spawned from the loin of a grotesque infidel?...

Ugh. These whispers that filled my head, these thoughts, they were not my own. But they wouldn’t stop.

The Tree was somehow forcing itself into my mind. I knew it. Its presence filled my eyes, its power induced the pervading silence. I needed to get my mind off of it or I would lose it.

As Colonel Johnson said I would.

…yet, the seal of the heretic binds him. His origin is as dark as his coming-

I DON’T EVEN KNOW WHO HE IS!

“Colonel, you copy?”

“Loud and clear, soldier. What’s the matter?”

"That warship, that red hourglass one back there, what was that?"

“Not a clue in the world.”

“…What about the original ship I escaped from? There were others like me hanging from racks, you guided me out of there. And those figures and monsters I fought off, what were they? Were they UAC? Or something else?”

“They were hostiles, soldier. Unfriendlies. I did what I had to do: get you out.”

I climbed into a particularly deep hollow in the Tree’s trunk and prepared to jet over to the next one when I heard a soft chittering behind me. I quickly spun around and only briefly saw something pale and spindly leap at me before I reflexively fired my flak cannon and blew it to pieces. I cautiously leaned over to peer at the thing, a white spider-like creature oozing pale green fluid and its thin legs still twitching. It was larger than any spider I’d ever seen, the size of both my hands put together.

“John, you alright?”

“I’m fine. Just a local, by the looks of it. I’m guessing there’s gonna be more of these as I climb the Tree, but they don’t seem too dangerous. Not yet, anyway.

That red ship,” I said as I jetted to the next recess, “there’s no way it could have been man-made. Was that ship built by demons? Are there…civilizations here?”

Johnson sighed. “There are more things in Hell and Earth, John, than are dreamt of in our philosophy.”

A simple yes or no would suffice, I cynically thought as I prepared myself for the oncoming sermon.

“We know that Hell is a realm of eternal consumption. What it doesn’t destroy, it assimilates and corrupts. Makes demonic. I remember that some Hell beasts were actually once mortal creatures native to our universe, which were assimilated into Hell one way or another. Ironic, first extraterrestrial life from our universe we ever meet is in another dimension, and covered in pentagrams, at that. Shit, I think the science quacks’ latest theory is that Pinkies are actually Hellified Earth boars! Demon pigs! Can you believe it?!”

I fired my jump pack and leapt for next recess.

“But those are just savage beasts. Pretty much zombies. They don’t think or act on their own, just take orders from their higher-ups and bite at anything living they find.

But there are higher powers here. The Hell Knights, and Summoners. Those are pretty strong, they’re native to Hell, and I doubt they’re the top of the demons’ food chain. Is there anything here that can build a ship? That would build a ship? Either Hellified aliens or…something else?”

“…The company believes that intelligent Infernal agencies DO exist, but we’ve yet to discover any.”

I spotted a faint red glow on the lowest on the Tree’s branches, not too far from my position. In absence of any other visual cue, I climbed in that direction, switching my guns back to missile launchers as I spotted more spiders emerge from hollows in the Tree’s trunk.

“I just…didn’t expect there to be civilizations here. I thought Hell was just a barren wasteland inhabited by powerful but savage monsters. But if there was a ship here, who built it? Who was flying it? Where do they come from? And what do they want with me?”

The Colonel did not respond, and the silence was punctuated only by my missiles blasting the spiders into oozing pieces of shell that fell to the distant ground below. I decided to drop the subject.

“We’ve discovered abandoned fortresses within Hell, clearly not built by mortals but some native Infernal agency. We know that because their architecture incorporates Hell’s metaphysics rather than our universe’s. And we have no idea who built them. It may have been a sapient race of demons that has since gone extinct, or perhaps they were driven out by some event. Fled to some dark unexplored pit of Hell. Now those fortresses are only inhabited by wild demonic beasts. Perhaps they are the descendants of that former civilization. Who knows? Maybe they’re the ones that destroyed it.”

Colonel Johnson’s revelation stunned me, and I shuddered as the implications flooded my mind.

“They did exist. They must still.”

I had climbed to right underneath the Tree branch, a thick white log as wide as a house. I ran to the edge of the trunk hollow in which I stood and fired my jump pack to the most of its capacity. I just barely managed to grab the branch by one hand, struggling to pick myself up. As I hoisted myself onto the edge, I looked up to find a multitude of pale spiders crawling towards me. I had opened fire before I even stood up.

“Maybe. But if they still exist, we haven’t recovered any evidence of such. The majority of Scout Bots we send never come back. And apart from Dr. Hayden, no human has returned either.”

Hayden. That name…the chairman of the UAC?

He’s the one that came to Hell and returned?

I spotted the red glow further out on the branch. I shot my way through a growing multitude of pale spiders as I ran in that direction. From a distance away I noticed the glow originated from within the scorched skeleton of some great beast, some horned creature with a huge many-jawed maw and two stumpy arms but no legs. Something small and flaming rose from the skeleton as I approached – is that a…horned skull? – before flying into my outstretched hand. I grit my teeth as the totem’s power surged into my system before turning around to unleash my new spell, ready to cast the burning skull in my hand.

“If he returned, then so will I.”

* * *?

The Marine blasted through several meters of steel and concrete, carving a path through the Tower exterior.

He broke into a large central chamber that spanned throughout the Tower’s whole base, the space completely taken up with facilities and huge machineries centered on the red beam of skyward Argent energy that crackled in the Tower’s core.

?

The Marine spotted high-speed elevators and even teleporter pods all around the chamber’s structure but these had been deactivated, no doubt by Pierce to slow his advance. He’d have to find some other way to reach the peak.

Something screeched above him, and the Marine looked up to see a pack of imps crawling on the suspended machinery towards him. The crowd outside the Tower hadn’t followed him but clearly there were already demons inside.

He switched to his assault rifle as he rushed towards the elevated circular platform surrounding the Argent beam, headed towards an observation deck directly behind it. The imps swarmed across the walls, baring their teeth and throwing fireballs at him, but he had already opened fire. PEW PEW PEW PEW PEW! The pack of imps crashed to the floor in bloody heaps.

Taking note of the possessed soldiers between him and the deck, the Marine switched to his combat shotgun and loaded a shrapnel shot as he jumped onto the elevated platform. BANG! BANG! BANG! Bits of flesh and guts splattered across the gleaming steel chamber. One surviving dark imp dared to pounce at the Marine; he snatched it out of the air and threw it directly into the crackling beam. A screech, a sizzle, and a fine red mist were all that remained.

The Marine prepared to leap onto the top of the observation deck before noticing the map station and firearm inside. The tell-tale roar of a Hell Knight echoed behind him. The map would be useful to quickly reach the top of the Tower.

With pounding footsteps behind him, the Marine crashed through the thick glass of the observation deck, tapped the map station’s download prompt and with the same fluid move picked up the gleaming black weapon from a guard’s corpse.

AUTO-SHOTGUN ACQUIRED

MUNITION TYPE – SHELLS

PRIMARY F-

Yeah, yeah, yeah.

The Marine turned around and unloaded fully automatic buckshot directly at the Hell Knight’s chest, practically melting the demon’s torso in a matter of seconds and stopping the monster in its tracks with the force of the blasts alone. The ravaged demon’s body hadn’t even hit the ground before the Marine crashed through the deck’s roof and dug his hands and feet into the Tower wall, taking strong leaps to rapidly ascend the sheer vertical surface.

Something howled nearby. Out of the corner of his eye, the Marine spotted a pack of Lost Souls charging at him. But these were larger than normal Lost Souls, their flames a deep red, their horns dark and gnarled. Terrors. These Lost Soul variants didn’t maul their prey, they exploded. Continuing to climb upwards, the Marine leapt across the vertical surfaces and walls while raining fire on the Terrors, shooting down the closest ones while dodging the rest’s suicidal charges.

After quickly glancing at his automap the Marine leapt onto a large service platform that bridged the Tower base to its main processing center, on the other side of a thick ceiling. The platform was covered in zombies and imps which had already set their sights on him. His rage surging, the Marine equipped his phase rifle and opened fire on the nearest demons as he Rampaged through the mob. There was no time to waste; Pierce was seven minutes away from reaching the Tower peak and he still had another eight hundred meters to climb, no doubt past stronger demons still.

ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP POW! Several zombies popped in electric surges while a dark imp was functionally vaporized with a heat blast. The Marine blazed towards the small service hatch on the ceiling which led to the main Tower core.

He calculated his trajectory, focused a Blood Punch, and jumped.

POWW!

* * *?

“Looks like a pool of condensed Argent plasma.”

The group of survivors stood silently before what could only be described as a pond of red, faintly luminous mist collected on the floor of the Extraction Site. The mist lapped and rippled slightly with the light Martian wind, but otherwise lay still between the steel machineries.

Must be some kind of leak nearby.

“Everyone stand back,” Ruby said as she primed her pulse rifle. “I need to test something out. Make sure you’re not stepping in the pool.”

The group warily stepped back as Ruby took aim.

Here goes nothing…I hope.

After briefest hesitation, she pulled the trigger.

The single plasmoid she fired vanished surreptitiously into the mist, which briefly glowed at the point of impact but otherwise disappeared uneventfully.

Ruby let out the breath she was holding in before stepping into the mist.

“Let’s go.”

“Agent!” Harrison suddenly yelled at Ruby. “I strongly object to this path, and urgently insist we find some other way to reach our destination!”

Ruby turned in exasperation towards the scientist.

“What’s the matter, Christopher?”

“That’s raw Argent plasma you’re stepping in! It is most unpredictable! We have no idea how it might react!”

“I just shot it with a pulse rifle, Christopher. Didn’t blow up, did it?”

“Might I be able to convince you that we perhaps circumvent these installations? That rover idea you had sounds most appeali-”

Rogers interrupted. “I’m getting sick of your whining, old man! Shut up and move or I’ll-”

“You know what, soldier?!” Romero decisively spoke up. “I myself am growing tired of YOUR shit! You’re becoming downright insufferable and now you’re pushing this poor old man around?!”

Oh, not this again.

“Back off, you damn-”

“Rogers! Romero! Please! This is not the time! We have to keep moving!”

The gunslinger reproachfully glared at the lieutenant but backed off.

“Christopher, I understand your concern, but we do not have a single moment to spare. We don’t know how long the enemy will stay at the Argent Tower and leaving the relative security of this facility could mean death for all of us. Don’t worry about the radiation, I’ll organize first-class medical treatment for all of you when we get back to Earth.”

The scientist just shook his head.

“You don’t know what you’re walking into.”

Ruby briefly thought back on her past experiences. The Tethering Operations, the vivisections, the containment breaches, the human sacrifices…

She forced herself back to the present and gave up trying to convince Harrison.

“On the double, people.”

She had barely heard a single footstep behind her when the sound of gunfire snapped like thunder.

“CONTACT!” Reeves shouted in terror.

In a flash, Ruby spun around and raised her gun at the attacker. A transparent red shape was charging through the pooled plasma at them, its effervescent outline flowing through the air and the engineer’s bullets passing through-

Wait, what?

The figure arrived at the group and swiped at Reeves. The engineer raised her arm in reflex, and the creature’s limb dissolved upon contact, the entire figure dissipating into swirling mist.

Reeves was unharmed.

Huh?

Rogers turned his phase rifle to a point behind Ruby.

“ANOTHER ONE!”

The lieutenant opened fire on the charging entity. The stream of plasmoids hit their mark and halted the figure’s advance, but these disappeared on impact, and the creature faded into swirling mist.

That means…

Several humanoid shapes roiled into being from the fog at the feet, but Ruby lowered her weapon.

”Everyone stand down!” She shouted. “I don’t think these are demons.”

The others continued desperately firing at the figures appearing around them, but quickly stopped when they realized they were not actually causing any harm. The shapes would close in, attempt to “slash” or “bite” at the survivors, and instantly dissolve when coming into contact, leaving not even the faintest scratch upon their quarry.

“Are…” Reeves cautiously poked at one of the figures, her hand passing clean through. “Are these…”

“Plasma.” Romero agreed. “Argent plasma, taking physical form.”

“…How is it doing this?”

The gunslinger puzzledly looked at the creature closest to him. It did not “attack” but stood docilely in front of him, tilting its head as if staring with curiosity.

“Wait a minute.”

Romero looked down at the weapon he was holding, and within moments the plasma in front of him changed shape to resemble the same exact vortex rifle the gunslinger held in his hands.

“Amazing. The plasma is reacting to us. Somehow it’s…taking the shape of whatever we’re thinking about.”

“That’s why it took the shape of the demons when we first set foot in it.” Rogers finished the train of thought. “Because that’s what was on our minds.”

A soft weeping sound turned the team’s attention to their rear. Harrison was on his knees, sobbing quietly within his helmet.

Romero moved to the elderly scientist’s side, resting a hand on his shoulder.

“I was a leading nuclear scientist on Earth for thirty years, a senior researcher in the Global Science Council. The UAC invited me, said my services would be invaluable to their research on Mars. But…Argent…”

Harrison wept quietly for a moment, and Romero looked up at Ruby in confusion. She puzzledly shrugged her shoulders.

The scientist then yelled as he shook his head.

“No one knows what Argent really is! Where it comes from! They say it’s from another dimension that operates under different principles, but it can’t be just that! It’s something more basic than universal vacuum energy, more fundamental! More primeval! It’s almost like…raw psychic energy! Information taken form!”

“Taylor,” Romero pressed Ruby. “He’s having a nervous breakdown. What should we do?”

“Rogers, did you pack any more sedatives into our bags?”

“I just found one syringe, Agent. It should be in your bag. We only have med packs after that.”

Ruby browsed in her bag as Harrison continued to ramble.

“My colleagues became obsessed with it! They were younger, thirstier, more ambitious! They kept babbling about spiritual energy field theory, how spirit exists in a higher realm than our material bodies! An abstract world of pure psychic potential, where minds are waves on the psychic sea! The Aether! They call it the Aether! Everything and nothing, all in one and all in none!”

Ruby found the syringe in a side pouch and quickly approached Harrison. She grabbed his arm, stuck the needle in a dedicated injection port on the wrist, and clicked the plunger.

“Reality is an illusion! Our universe is an illusion! Matter doesn’t exist! Energy doesn’t exist! There is only nothing, and weightless thoughts floating through the Aether! Empty space and vagrant thoughts! Empty space and vagrant thoughts. Empty space, and…vagrant…”

Harrison’s elevated pulse quickly coursed the sedative through his system, and within moments he was tranquil again.

“Hiro, can you help me carry him?”

“Of course.”

Romero put the languid scientist’s arm around his shoulder and hoisted him up.

“We’re running out of time,” Ruby reminded the group. “We need to get to Helix.”

* * *?

I used the last of my spellcasting energy to cast one final burning skull at the dwindling spider horde. The skull hit its mark and exploded in a swell of flame, sending the charred survivors scuttling away into the Tree.

“I think that’s the last of them.”

“Right-o. Let’s keep moving.”

“Keep walking along this branch. You have to get to the ends.”

“Copy that.”

This energy, it’s almost like mana, no? I think that’s what the resource used to cast spells is called. At least mine regenerates on its own.

I set off to reach the tip of the branch on which I stood. I wondered what I would find there. Leaves? Empty twigs? Or something else?

Leaves? Stop being an idiot, John. If you’re climbing a big white Tree in Hell, you’re not gonna be there for the damn leaves.

“Hey, look at that.”

I spotted a clear red orb some distance away, growing out of the branch’s pale swirling surface like a bloody pustule.

“What is this, Colonel?” I asked as I walked up to the translucent sac.

“The geeks call it blood sap. Apparently it’s a natural secretion from the Tree’s metabolic cycle.”

“Can I use it?”

“Well, records show it boosts normal humans’ vitality and cognitive functions, at least for a time, but the side effects-”

I brought my foot down on the pustule and felt instant relief as the thick salve was absorbed by my chassis, mending the lesions I carried from the forest of spines.

“So, how do I use it? Is there a chemistry thesis I need to read? Maybe a cookbook? I don’t imagine they make this in Hell’s Kitchen?” I sneered, feeling better than ever.

“Aren’t you funny.”

“Heh. Wait a minute, you said this sap is produced by the Tree’s metabolism,” I remarked as I continued forward. “What do you mean, metabo…”

“…That.”

I stopped in awe – and horror – of the sight before me.

The Tree branch had begun to split into countless smaller limbs and dendrites, and upon these I could see countless creatures impaled upon the tips. Creatures of every shape and size, pierced by pale white tendrils that snaked throughout their bodies.

“Of…course,” I lowly groaned as I realized what I had just taken into my body.

As I looked closer, it almost seemed that these beings weren’t demons, although I imagined their grotesque shapes had been corrupted by Hell’s reality, but perhaps they were…aliens? Aliens from my universe? They didn’t seem as monstrous or horrendous as the other Hell beasts I had encountered, and I could see hints of green, gold, blue, vivid colors besides just black and red on their bodies and…tools. Some of them carried tools.

Maybe even weapons.

“Gonna look for guns, right?”

“Affirmative.”

I meandered around the corpses, looking for any one that carried what might be firearms. The bodies were fascinating in their own way. I saw snake-like beings with thick armored shells, crystalline insectoids the size of people, figures which appeared like gleaming metallic sculptures, like steel shards fused to form a single creature. I took care to keep my distance, because I didn’t recognize the tools strewn around them, and figured they might just as well be bombs or traps.

I stopped in front of one creature which I thought could help me. It was a beige, somewhat humanoid entity with two legs, four arms, and a mass of tentacles trailing from its back. Four deep eye sockets stared from what I assumed was its mouthless head. However, what interested me was the object held in its…hands? Claws? Whatever. Long, sleek, and black, with a barrel and grip. I knew a gun when I saw one.

“Colonel, this here looks like a gun to me. But, there’s only one, and my chassis has two weapon rigs.”

“Don’t worry about that, I’ll take care of it. Pick that up.”

I carefully stepped around the being’s trailing tentacles to approach it. I leaned over its gaunt frame and pried the weapon from its…screw it, I’m calling them hands, cringing as it dribbled thick slime from the creature’s body.

“Ugh. You got this, Colonel?”

“Yeah. Just place it up to your gun platforms.”

I did just that and my chassis grabbed the gun out of my hands.

“Hmm…all right. Just give me a minute here…So, you were right. This in fact IS a gun, and a decently strong one at that. Looks like a plasma autocannon that fired explosive armor-piercing rounds. However, because of the way your chassis is rigged, I have to split this gun into two separate components, which can fire either AP or explosive rounds but not both. Is that okay?”

Before I could even answer, Colonel Johnson cut me off.

“That was a rhetorical question, by the way. That’s the way they’re going on, like it or not.”

I sighed in resignation, when suddenly I felt myself grow weak and my knees quiver. I landed hard on my hands and gaped as the world spun around me. The pale surface of the Tree took up my entire field of view, forcing itself into my mind…

THE POWER HELD WITHIN THE CRUCIBLE WILL PUNISH MAN-BORN AND DEMON-KIN ALIKE. IT WILL CRUSH THE DIVIDE. IT WILL CORRUPT ALL REALMS. IT WILL CREATE THE MONSTER. IT MUST NEVER BE FOUND.

“AAAAHHHH!!!!”

“John, I’m losing you! Your signature’s fading!”

“I’m okay, I’m okay,” I assured the Colonel as I gathered my bearings. “Ugggh. Just…had a lapse in composure.

I need to get out of here, Colonel. The Tree’s influence is getting stronger. Like it’s rooting inside my head. How much further till the branch tip?”

“It’s not too far but hurry. Once the psychoactive symptoms appear, there’s no telling what the Tree might do to you.”

My mana was restored, but a niggle at the back of my mind urged me to grab my bronze spear. I pulled the knife from my side and flicked the switch, feeling satisfaction with the heft of the weapon in my hands.

“I’ve made it this far. I’m not going down just yet.”

* * *?

The Marine crashed through the hatch leading to the main Tower center and landed solidly on the floor.

“Remember, faithful advocates,” chirped a projection of the Spokeswoman. “The Argent Tower is our Triumphal Arch. It is the center of our universe. You must care for the Altar to our Faith with utmost reverence and devo-”

WHAT THE-

BANG BANG BANG BANG BANG BANG BANG!

The small holographic projector was no match for the sustained salvo of buckshot from the Marine’s autoshotgun, who kept firing long after the device was charred dust smeared on the facility floor.

What the hell had THAT been? That wasn’t vapid corporate drivel, that was something else. Altar? Faith? What exactly was the UAC up to?

The Marine continued upwards as he leapt across the great steel structures towards a focus in the Argent beam, a pitch-black sphere suspended at the center of the Tower surrounded by a scarlet halo. He noted more teleporters positioned throughout the chamber at regular intervals.

?

“HAAARRRGGGHHH!”

The Marine instantly froze on a narrow walkway leading up to the black sphere. He switched to his HAR and searched for the source of the sound.

“HAAARRRGGGHHH!”

That howl. He’d never actually heard it with his own ears. Only in visions. In nightmares. Vivid fever dreams within a padded white cell from a time long past.

Before he became what he was now.

“HAAARRRGGGHHH!”

The Marine could sense a presence within the chamber, but he could not track it.

…It was right on top of him.

?

The Marine rolled out of way before the imposing figure landing on him, and he whipped his HAR back around to retaliate against his attacker but stopped when he finally caught sight of it.

A skeletal human drawn to grotesque proportions, pale skin and bloody flesh torn free from its distended bones, the abdominal organs completely exposed and dripping down its legs. It stood head-and-shoulders above the Marine, bearing a UAC-branded jetpack with two shoulder-mounted rocket launchers, and two cloudy lidless eyeballs staring blindly deep within its bald skull. At its heart, the Marine sensed not the soul of a human, but a demon.

What had they done?

Most disturbingly, the creature was twitching. Shivering as if from cold, its gaunt limbs flailing from muscle spasms. As the Marine looked on, the creature grabbed the skin on its temples and tore it clean off its skull, violently shaking its head and releasing a blood-curdling screech as blood poured onto its harness.

“HEEEAAARRRGGGHHH!”

The Marine would burn the entire UAC to the ground.

His HEALTH remained at 26 from the intense battle at the Argent Facility, so acting quickly he brought up his Suit’s Dossier, dodging the burst of homing rockets from the demon’s shoulder launchers as he signaled the Power Engine to fabricate a Mega Charge.

Clang! Both the Marine’s HEALTH and ARMOR instantly rocketed to 200, and his available Calibration Cycles dropped to six.

With restored HEALTH and ARMOR, he equipped his rocket launcher and fired a shot. The demon flared its jet thrusters and easily dodged the rocket.

The Marine swiftly backtracked and switched to the super shotgun. BANG! BANG! BANG! He shot at the demon as it roared at him and fired a pair of rockets at the explosive barrels in his path, bursting them and washing him in the crimson flames. 184 ARMOR.

?


Racing towards the demon to deliver a close-range blast, the creature threw a swift fist at him, who caught it in his left hand with a vicious grip. The demon threw the other fist, and he caught that one too. Firing up his jump pack, the Marine forced the creature down and delivered a forceful kick directly at the demon’s head, feeling a satisfying crack beneath his foot.

He kickflipped off of it and brought back his rocket launcher, tracking the stunned demon before pulling the trigger. The rocket hit its mark and blasted a chunk of the demon’s jetpack off.
?
Furious, the creature released an echoing roar into the air. The ring of deactivated teleporters whirred into operation and a horde of demons flooded the chamber. Imps, Hell Knights, and possessed soldiers with jump packs of their own. Unhindered, the Marine threw several grenades and proximity mines as he switched back to the HAR. The explosions rocked throughout the Tower and splattered the walls with demon blood, which the jetpack demon evaded by leaping into the air and hovering using its thrusters. He noted the surviving crowd managed to land several hits on him, but with such greatly elevated vitality the Marine was not concerned. A pair of laser sights shone from the creature’s launchers and fired a devastating barrage of rockets, which struck him and reduced his ARMOR to 156. He fired at the jetpack demon while charging a Blood Punch and releasing it unto a squad of possessed soldiers, eviscerating them and bringing his ARMOR up to 173.

Putting his HAR away, the Marine rushed beneath the creature and leapt up to it, firing his own jump pack and latching on to the demon. Once on it, he savagely tore at the creature’s jetpack, which in its confusion flew haphazardly to try and throw the Marine off, crashing into the Tower walls and machineries but the Marine’s grip was like iron and he would not be fazed by mere walls. With a single punch, one of the demon’s shoulder launchers was blown clean off.

He noted the creature’s trajectory would take it directly towards the black sphere at the center of the chamber, and unwilling to find out the effects of close proximity, the Marine jumped off the demon and swiftly switched to his rocket launcher before firing at a Hell Knight below, landing on the wounded monster and crushing its head with contemptuous disgust.

The jetpack demon indeed flew close to the black sphere in its aimless path and was electrocuted by its sinister aura of Argent energy, falling to the ground in a burning heap as its jetpack sparked and smoked.

Crashing hard on the ground, the creature picked itself up and stared with malignant hatred at the Marine.

“HAAARRRGGGHHH!”

With the last of its strength, the demon rose into the air and directed hellish energy into its hands, forming two large rifts on either side of itself. The Marine fired a rocket but it was too late. The ritual was complete, and two large floating demons appeared in the chamber. They were round and brick-red with spikes throughout their bodies, a gaping multi-jawed maw full of vicious fangs, short shriveled limbs that hung limply at their sides, and a single glaring green eye. The chamber became filled with the sharp and pungent smell of ozone. Cacodemons.

Great.

Firing a rocket into their midst and remotely detonating it, the Marine Rampaged towards the moribund jetpack demon. He switched to his super shotgun and destroyed its remaining launcher with a well-aimed explosive slug. The incapacitated creature rushed towards the Marine and tried to throw one last punch, but he blocked it with his Bracer and staggered the demon with the power surge. With the creature dropping to its knees, the Marine forced his hand into the demon’s jetpack and crushed its core. The malfunctioning device began to spin and flew the creature into a pack of imps, exploding and killing them all.

Furious at the present setback, the Marine set his sights on the two Cacodemons. He could have reached the Tower peak with the other demons alone, but Cacos were tough. Brute but savage scavengers of the Sloughlands, they’d never let him reach the peak if he didn’t kill them now.

Moving back to gain some space, he equipped his HAR and shot one Caco in its eye with a precision bolt. The monster faltered in brief blindness, and keeping one eye on the other Caco with its crackling maw, the Marine charged at a dark imp with chainsaw in hand. He stopped the creature with a stun bomb and drove the saw into its heart before slicing its head in two, collecting its gushing fluids to restock munitions.

A buzzing sound whirred behind the Marine and a flurry of lightning bolts, each as strong as that from a thunderstorm, pelted his back and reduced his ARMOR to 121. He whipped around and fired a rocket at the assailing Caco. He continued his attack with a barrage of plasmoids from his phase rifle and threw one final grenade directly into the demon’s open maw. The creature stood still for the briefest moment before exploding in spectacular fashion, drenching the floor below with thick blue blood.

The other Cacodemon floated lazily after the Marine but spit ball after ball of crackling blue lightning at him, which exploded on impact and blasted away at the walls of the Tower, eviscerating any lesser demons in their wake and chipping at his ARMOR. He equipped his combat shotgun and shot the monster with several shrapnel shots, faltering it and moving in with the auto shotgun. Cacodemons had a devastating bite which could slice through even Hell Knights with frightening ease, but that was a necessary risk as time was of the essence.

The Marine took aim and held the trigger down on the auto shotgun, blowing off great chunks of the Cacodemon’s hard hide to reveal the bloodstained bone beneath, and with a strong leap he jumped towards it. Through a barrage of buckshot the monster spotted him and opened its mouth to deliver a horrendous bite, but the Marine struck the creature with his Bracer and staggered it, forcing his fist through its eye and crushing the brain behind.

With the Cacodemons gone the Marine prepared to continue to the peak when he noticed a telltale arcane signature from below, where the corpse of the jetpack demon lay. A floating silvery object with an electrified surface. A runestone.

Moving quickly, he fell to the site of the corpse while dodging demon projectiles and passed his hand on the stone to absorb its power.

RUNE ACQUIRED – LETHAL FORCE

ALL DEMONS WILL PRODUCE SMALL EXPLOSION ON DEATH

EXPLOSION WILL NOT HARM SELF

With his rune-bearing capacity full, the Marine fired up his jump pack and climbed towards his destination.

<That jetpack demon you faced was a Revenant,> commented the talking computer, <one of the latest advancements in mass-produced synthdemons from the Lazarus Project.>

Revenants. That’s what the UAC called them.

The origin of the name was all too obvious.

<They are produced by continually exposing viable living human volunteers to critical doses of Lazarus waves, and upgrading their bodies with cybernetic components and weapon systems during the period of mutation.>

He already knew that the UAC was experimenting on demons to augment their power, but now they were intentionally enabling human demonization? Fabricating inhuman abominations for the purpose of combat? On whom did they plan to unleash these creations on? The outer colonies? Other species throughout the universe? Earth?

Pierce was three minutes from reaching the Tower peak. The Marine blazed like a rocket across every available wall and surface as he soared upwards.

Olivia Pierce would die.

The UAC would pay for what they’d done.

Far beneath the Marine, a holographic projection of the Spokeswoman cheerfully preached into a bloodstained chamber.

“The road to Hell is paved – by Argent energy.

And remember: from within flows the power. The power must always flow. You have been warned.”

* * *?

“We’re almost there, team. Just a bit further.”

The group of survivors was almost to the Helix Labs. The extraction site had suffered some damage from the initial attack and there were a number of Argent plasma leaks throughout the station, but so far the team had yet to come across other hazards or enemies.

But Ruby was anxious to leave the station as soon as possible. She did not trust the strange plasma at her feet and Harrison’s rambling had left her unnerved.

Empty space and vagrant thoughts. Aether. Spiritual energy field theory. Guess the old man has really lost it. Wonder how much longer the others will last.

She looked back at the sedated scientist. His shotgun hung limply at his side and Romero still carried him on his shoulder. Ruby was just grateful that the gunslinger was as cooperative as he was.

“How about we take a minute, Taylor? Christopher’s getting a bit heavy.”

“…All right. But just one minute. We can make a proper stop at Helix.”

“Copy,” Romero groaned as he set Harrison down.

The others gathered round to sit and stretch their legs, but Ruby moved ahead to take a moment for herself and her thoughts. She didn’t notice the red pool of plasma in the clearing beyond the team’s position.

I wonder if we can pass through Helix and the Spaceport. How are we getting off the planet? VEGA said Command was still active but that was more than an hour ago. Are both Hayden and Pierce still alive? What are they doing now?

…What is the Marine doing now?

She’d read the report. He’d been a United States Space Marine in the early twenty-first century, sentenced to life imprisonment on Mars for killing his commander. He would have been sentenced to death but a high-ranking colonel pleaded for his life.

A family member, I think it was.

He spent eleven years in a maximum-security military prison in the UAC’s first Martian colony. When Mars lost contact with its moons in the Phobos Event, he and a squad of other incarcerated soldiers were sent to investigate. None returned and no one was ever found, except him. In a prison tomb in Hell a century later. Chained inside an enchanted stone sarcophagus. The expedition even brought back Hellish artifacts warning other demons to never let him escape.

Just what the hell did the man do? What happened to him? And what will he do now?

A movement out of the corner of her eye brought her gaze up.

It was the Marine. At least an impression of him in the plasma, gliding across the pool leaving ethereal vapor in his wake.

That armor. Almost man-made, but it’s not from Earth or even Argent D’Nur. Where did he get it from? Hell? Or somewhere else?

Gnarled figures in the shape of demons appeared in the plasma, which the Marine’s impression charged at and crushed beneath his fists.

Where does his power come from? He does not fear the demons, the demons fear him. What drives him? What is the source of his strength? His motivation?

Duty? Faith? Glory? Justice?

Or perhaps revenge?

Can he survive?

Can he win?

“Who is that?”

Oh shit.

The entire team had snuck up behind Ruby as she stood deep in thought, and they all arrived to the scene of the plasma Marine vanquishing a legion of plasma demons.

A scene that none of them had the clearance to witness.

Well, if I’m not the most stupid…

“That.” Ruby stated at a loss for words. “That is…”

“That’s the Marineguy, isn’t it?” Reeves spoke up.

Oh, I love you, Amanda.

“Marineguy?” Romero asked.

“It’s a company mascot that Marketing came up with,” Ruby enthusiastically finished. “An exemplary soldier of sorts, circulated as collectible figurines among the workers.”

“Yeah, the other guys in my unit liked to print their own designs,” Reeves commented. “I even made one myself, modeled after a mining engineer.”

“But, why is he killing the demons?” Rogers asked puzzledly.

Ruby thought carefully on her answer before responding.

“Because…he’s a good soldier. The very best.”

It wasn’t a lie.

“Eh,” Romero acknowledged half-heartedly. “Weird armor.”

“You should see your own.”

“Hey! Function over form, sister!” But the gunslinger was chuckling.

“Let’s go. The entrance to Helix is just a few minutes out.”

“Right behind you, Agent.”

Ruby took one last look at the Marine’s shape and set off towards the Labs, the others following in her steps.

Behind them, the impressions of the demons and Marine dwindled a few more moments before fading into nothing.

* * *?

I was approaching the end of the Tree branch. The smaller limbs forking off it grew narrower, and I could see faint white lights through the turquoise haze.

“There! Those are the branchtips! Step on it!”

I picked up the pace and ran towards my destination. My journey here was almost done; I could finally leave this abominable Tree behind.

“HSSSSSS!”

I skidded to a halt as a bone-chilling hiss pierced the silence like a knife, and stared in terror as a giant pale spider emerged from its hiding spot on the Tree’s surface. I backed away in fear.

This one was huge, its legs alone as long as I was tall, dripping slime from its bulbous body and staring at me with a multitude of clear red eyes.

“HSSSSSS!”

“HSSSSSS!”

I spun around to witness a dozen other spiders closing in around me, and before long I was surrounded.

“Okay,” I muttered while spinning my new machine guns and raising my spear. “I suppose you fellas aren’t in the mood to talk this out?”

“HISSSSSS!” One of the spiders screeched as it swiped at me with a spiked leg.

“Neither am I.”

POW POW POW POW POW POW!

A fury of crimson bolts erupted from my guns and ripped their way through the horde, piercing through the mass of shells and filling the air with green goo and severed limbs.

I fired my jump pack to dash between the spiders and stabbed at them with my spear. I thrust it into the soft underside of one and pulled it out through its head, cut down the legs of another and sunk it into its eyes, all the while firing my guns in every direction I heard a spider coming from.

The surviving spiders retreated further away but I knew they’d be back before long.

“Hurry! Get to one of those branchtips and get off the Tree!”

I turned and rushed away to the nearest end of the branch, which as I approached was revealed to be a mass of thin swaying dendrites with glowing bulbs on the ends.

Well, it’s not leaves.

“What do I do now?”

“This is the tricky part. Grab one of those tendrils and place it onto your forehead.”

“I’m sorry, come again?”

“Your head, soldier!”

“There is no way in Hell I am placing that thing on my head!”

“You need to plug in to the Tree’s psychic network to open an exit portal! It’s the only way!”

“So I can end up like all those other types that the Tree was feeding on?!”

“Do it! Do it now!”

“That’s a negative, Colonel!”

“They’re coming back!”

Colonel Johnson was right. I could see a swarm of spiders – well, that’s certainly more than a dozen – crawling towards me from beyond the curve of the Tree branch.

There was no way I’d be able to kill all of them.

“Uggghhh…GOD DAMN IT!” I yelled as I grabbed the nearest tendril in hand.

“Visualize an exit portal! Make it the one thought in your head and let it fill your mind! If you don’t, you could get lost in the collective mindscape of all the beings assimilated by the Tree!”

“Assimi…? Wait, you mean those creatures are still alive?!”

“Do it now!”

I did as the Colonel commanded and forced the tendril onto my head, feeling it branch out into countless smaller dendrites that swarmed around me before everything went black.

…a portal, a portal. I need to get off this Tree…

Black. Pure black, I floated in the empty nothingness.

…a portal, a portal. Anywhere. Take me anywhere. But I need to get out of here…

I felt the presence of others nearby. Travelers like me. They yelled. Cried. Implored.

…portal, portal, portal. I am imagining a portal. I. Me. I need to leave. I need to leave this place…

They’d been prisoners of the Tree for too long. They got lost, fell captive to its roots. Became trapped within their own bodies.

…get out of here. I need to get out of here. Anywhere. Anywhere. Give me a portal…

They had homes. They had hopes and dreams. They had families.

…families?...

Families. Families like nothing I’d ever seen before. Offspring, communities, nests, colonies, unity on a scale I could never imagine.

Golden locks, warm smile. Brown hair and a wide grin.

My family.

“John, where are you?”

My family.

“Daddy, when are you coming home?”

My family.

“John, please. I’m so alone…”

No.

“Daddy, I’m scared!”

No.

“They’re coming in through the windows!”

No.

“Daddy, they’re in our house!”

No.

“John!”

“Daddy!”

“Help!”

“NOOOOOO!!!”

I opened my eyes with burning fury and tore the cursed tendrils from my head. They split into more dendrites that swarmed over my body but I slashed at them with my spear.

“YOU WILL NOT HAVE MY FAMILY!!”

I poured all of my anger, all of my fear, all of my energy and mana into one last thrust. Without realizing it, the spear erupted in flame and sank into the Tree with a cold shing, sending a chill down my back.

At once the mass of tendrils shriveled away into ash as the Tree’s pale surface turned brown and bloodshot, as if it were rotting. The decay spread from the site of the spear’s laceration and out along the rest of the branch. The horde of spiders, which I’d completely forgotten about, stopped in their tracks and swarmed away into the shadows with terrifying speed. The hazy sky turned from turquoise to a sinister shade of red. I knew deep down that I had hopelessly and irreparably screwed up.



DEMON.



“John! A portal is forming!”

Sure enough, a whirlpool of energy began to form out towards the end of the branch, and a rift appeared in the center of the chaos. Not another one, I thought as I remembered the unpleasant passage I’d previously taken.

“Look out!”

I heard a horrendous snapping sound from above, and I looked up to see a dreadful shape descending from the top of the Tree towards me, its colossal legs reaching across the Tree’s upper branches and casting it in their shadow.

A giant hand?

No…a GIANT spider.

On second thought, the rift isn’t really such a bad idea.

“Time to go!”

“Agreed!”

I collapsed my spear and ran as fast as I could towards the portal, firing my jump pack to its full power as I raced to escape the terror above that drew nearer by the second.

Why can’t I ever just make a normal exit?

The sky exploded with an ear-splitting roar as something crashed behind me and I leapt into the portal.

* * *?

<The Accumulator’s energy signature indicates that it is nearing the top of the Argent Tower.>

“If she ruptures that accumulator near the Argent beam, she could open a portal to their world that we will NEVER be able to close!”

Pierce was moments away from reaching the Tower peak, from where the refined Argent energy was beamed to the orbiting Martian Starport. The Marine raced across the last floor of the facility, Rampaging through every wall, every gate and demon in his path, when he heard Pierce’s indignant voice echo over the PA system.

“You cannot stop me from claiming what I am owed! What I was promised!”

The Marine’s blood blazed with scorching fury, the frequencies emanating from his Resonators warbling and trilling as the Praetor Suit struggled to keep him cognizant, his rage reaching critical mass and threatening to overtake his every rational thought.

He breached the control deck which opened unto the Argent beam beyond.

“This is not the end!” Yelled Pierce from behind the locked gate. “It is only…”

The Marine crashed through the thick metal and aimed his combat shotgun. Pierce had already primed the Argent accumulator, which crackled with scarlet lightning, and weakly limped backwards towards the beam.

“…the beginning!”

He pulled the trigger.

CLANG!

CRASH!

Something large landed heavily on the walkway between Pierce and the Marine, who winced as the slug he just fired was reflected back at him. 93 ARMOR.

The figure on the walkway rose to its feet. It was a Hell Knight, at least what appeared to be a variant of the Hell Knight species, but unlike any the Marine had ever seen before. Unlike normal Hell Knights or even the cyberknight he’d encountered at the Argent Facility, this one was entirely cybernetic. Its thick robotic legs ended with gnarled metal claws, its torso was shielded with broad plates of armor, its head a sinister robotic skull whose eyes shone red with infernal hatred. There was a missile launcher at the end of its right arm, and in its left arm the monster carried a shield bearing a glaring crimson eye in the center of a green triangular sigil. The Sigil of the Blasphemous One.

?

This monster was a Hell Paladin, one of a legion of elite Hell Knights that guarded important relics and locations in the nether world, which instantly raised the Marine’s alarms. He had never encountered a Paladin outside of Hell, and most worryingly, that meant that this one was not from the UAC. He had noticed immediately that its augmentations were forged from fellsteel, a powerful metal native to the Infernal Realm that the UAC would never be able to engineer. But Hell Paladins were empowered and commanded by high-ranking demon lords, and would never dare take an order from a human.

Someone from Hell had sent this Cyber Paladin here.

To protect Olivia Pierce as she forced open the Argent Fracture.

All this flashed through the Marine’s mind in the brief moment that he beheld the cybernetic demon as Olivia Pierce stepped into the Argent beam, raising the accumulator above her as an offering before vanishing in a thunderous explosion.

The Marine was thrown back with the force of the blast and he lost sight of the Cyber Paladin.

“Category Three interdimensional event detected,” spoke the automated facility voice as a writhing wave of demons swarmed into the arena from over the walls while even more began pouring through the rift forming around the beam.

“The Fracture has been breached! You must leave the Tower at once!”

The Marine equipped his rocket launcher as he fell back from the horde. If he died now, the expanding rift would undoubtedly suck him directly into Hell.

He fired rocket after rocket while tossing grenades and proximity mines in every direction but to no avail. Zombies, imps, Hell Knights, and Revenants crawled over the walls while Cacodemons and other nightmarish monstrosities flowed from the central portal which widened by the second.

?

Damn it, damn it, DAMN IT!

“Welcome to the UAC,” the Spokeswoman gleefully exclaimed nearby, “opening the gates of Hell with the key to the future.”

DAMN IT ALL!!!

In a flash of lightning the Marine gave in to his rage and became ablaze with scarlet flames. He’d gone Berserk.

“Category Four interdimensional event in ten, nine…”

He grabbed a Hell Knight’s head and ripped it clean off its shoulders, made a Revenant explode with a single blow, grabbed the side jaws of a Cacodemon and split the monster in two. Through repeated Blood Punches and the crowd of demons exploding on death through his Lethal Force rune, the Marine cleared a path to the Tower wall.

The ground shook at his feet and the world became tilted as the top of the Tower crumbled over its foundations, weakened by the explosion. The Marine fired his jump pack to avoid the Argent beam as it sliced across the sliding floor and rushed away to avoid being trapped within the collapsing Tower.

The corridor spun and threw endless demons against the walls, floor, and ceiling as appliances were thrown into the air. The Marine, still Berserk, Rampaged across these and every surface that crossed his path, breaking through and sliding across walls as he raced to reach the ground and put as much distance between himself and the Tower as quickly as possible.

Thinking fast, the Marine recoiled in excruciating fury and instantly released his remaining Berserk energy in a tremendous explosion that vaporized the shattered remains of the Tower’s peak around him, and he was back in open air.

CRASH!

Something large struck the Marine as he fell down the Tower’s exterior. It was the Cyber Paladin which had clutched the Marine in a vice-like grip, bent on dragging him to Hell with it.

The Marine freed himself from the demon’s clutch and grabbed his assault rifle. PEW PEW PEW PEW PEW PEW PEW! The monster raised its shield and deflected the rounds back at the Marine, increasingly furious as they ticked away at his ARMOR.

He switched to the rocket launcher. BOOM! BOOM! BOOM! The rockets exploded against the shield but did no harm to it or the Paladin behind.

Clever thing. It had waited until after the he’d gone Berserk because it knew that neither it nor its worthless shield could survive the full power of the Marine’s unleashed rage.

He raised the launcher over the edge of the shield and pulled the trigger, detonating the rocket as it passed over the demon. BOOM! The Cyber Paladin was caught in the blast and faltered, lowering its shield.

The Marine fired his jump pack and closed the distance to the monster, latching onto it as the two remained in free-fall.

He struck left and right at the monster’s face, feeling the infernal metal dent with every successful blow. The demon fired at him with its missile launcher, the projectiles exploding against the Marine’s armor and beginning to eat into his HEALTH, but their splash damage and his Boiling Blood rune reciprocated that harm back unto the Paladin. The Marine noticed the armor over the creature’s heart begin to crack.

The creature raised its shield to the Marine’s next blow, blocking the strike and sending a burning wave of arcane energy back towards the Marine, who felt an unmistakable crack beneath his fist.

54 HEALTH.

The Marine focused power into a Blood Punch and brought it down onto the damned shield, shattering it in a flash of embers and breaking the Paladin’s arm off into a bloody spike.

22 HEALTH.

The demon roared in agony and thrust the spike into the Marine’s side.

0 HEALTH.

In his last moment of consciousness, the Marine thrust his hand through the Cyber Paladin’s armor and tore its heart out as the world erupted in red.

* * *?

“Whew! Everyone okay?” Ruby exclaimed as the airlock sealed behind the team and she refreshed her atmosphere supply, taking a deep breath of fresh air.

“I am a-okay,” replied Romero as he took his helmet off and lowered himself to the floor, bringing his backpack around and opening it.

“Copy that, Agent.”

“Amanda, you okay?”

“Yeah, I think so.”

“Christopher? Christopher?”

The dazed scientist was coming out of his sedated stupor.

“Uggh…my head…”

“Take it easy, you had a small episode back there,” assured Ruby as she lowered Harrison to a bench.

“My mouth is dry. I feel…ugh, what happened?”

“Well, what happened was we all made a stupid decision coming to Mars, but you most of all,” joked Ruby as she offered the elderly scientist a water bottle before standing up. “I hear the Global Science Council pays very well. And death-by-demons isn’t an occupational hazard there.

All right. Listen up, everyone. We’ve made it to Helix. Great job. The first thing we’re gonna do is rest and reload. Stretch your legs, drink plenty of water, grab a bite, but restock your guns and make sure your air tanks are full! Lieutenant, run an inventory check of all our supplies, and keep an eye on the civvies. Romero and I will-”

“Agent,” muttered the gunslinger as he gaped at a point above and behind her.

Ruby turned to where Romero and the rest of the team were staring at. On a ceiling-mounted display above them, Ruby could see live video feed of the Argent Tower from the adjacent Facility.

Or of what had once been the Argent Tower.

The entire structure blazed with infernal energy, scorching the surrounding region and even the atmosphere with crimson hellfire. A writhing black mass of claws and teeth – endless legions of demons as far as the eye could see – spread out through the ground and air to every direction of Mars’ surface. Radiating with a hellish halo, the image of the Tower was like a great evil eye, staring directly at the group of survivors.

ARGENT FRACTURE BREACHED

CATEGORY FOUR INTERDIMENSIONAL EVENT DETECTED

EVACUATE THE PLANET IMMEDIATELY

That could only mean one thing: the Marine had failed.

He was gone.

“What do we do now, Agent?”

Ruby looked over her shoulder towards her team, but she had no idea how to respond. She had no idea what to do.

God help us all.


“In the First Age, in the First Battle, when the shadows first lengthened, one stood.

Burned by the embers of Armageddon, his soul blistered by the fires of Hell and tainted beyond Ascension, he chose the path of perpetual torment.

In his ravenous hatred he found no peace; and with boiling blood he scoured the Umbral Plains seeking vengeance against the dark lords who had wronged him.

He wore the crown of the Night Sentinels, and those that tasted the bite of his sword named him...

The DOOM SLAYER.”

- Excerpt from the Slayer’s Testament


E1M6: The Shores of Hell?

The Doom Slayer opened his eyes.

He found himself floating weightlessly in an abstract world of shadowed mountains, suspended in the midst of a sinister sanguine sky. Space and time as existed on Mars had ceased to exist. The light that shone in this world did not illuminate, and the mountains around him were not made of a rock that appeared on any mortal world.

The Slayer could sense the unmistakable nature of the reality he was now present in. It did not operate under the principles of his universe. Or any physical universe, for that matter.

The plane of existence he was present in was inconceivably more arcane.

More primeval.

Chaotic.

Home to powers beyond the comprehension of any mortal soul.

He was in an Immortal Realm.

He was in Hell.

FUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUCCCCCCCKKKKKKK!!!!!!!

A scorching inferno of savage fury ignited in the Slayer’s heart, overpowering his senses and filling his mind with blinding violence.

He willed a command unto the reality around him, and at once the formless world took the shape of a barren landscape at his feet, a dark ragged surface blotched with crimson veins. Feeling the sensation of ground beneath his feet, he blazed off with terrifying speed across the Hellscape searching for something to murder.

He did not care who or what it was.

He had died.

He had failed to stop Olivia Pierce from breaching the Fracture.

And now a Hellgate was fully open on Mars.

Something was going to die.

He sensed a presence some distance ahead, a demonic citadel populated with thousands of wretched beings.

A lot of somethings were going to die.

The Slayer swerved in the direction of the citadel with ravenous bloodlust coursing through his veins, crushing the ground with every step he took. He was rapidly approaching the citadel, located on the other side of a looming mountain that blocked his path.

Gritting his teeth with agonizing force as he sprinted even faster, the Slayer leapt into the air and smashed through the infernal mountain like a bullet through glass, sending great shards of rock and rubble flying like meteors.

The demonic fortress came into view. It was a despicable construct of dark and twisted metal like a mass of colossal sawblades, suspended in the hellish sky above the desolate wasteland.

At once, towering structures positioned around the citadel’s perimeter wailed in echoing alarm.

HE IS HERE.

The citadel’s Hellstorm Pylons, great cycloptic entities bearing ocular cannons and Cyclone Railguns, entered combat mode and set their sights on the charging Slayer as the fortress clearly prepared for emergency evacuation, but the Slayer had chosen his prey.

Great bolts of lightning erupted from the Pylons’ eyes towards the Slayer as their railguns fired enormous crackling slugs the size of fighter ships, but the Slayer was faster still. He dodged and strafed his way through the hail of missiles as he stayed his course for the citadel.

The fortress was rising away from the landscape, and the rippling waves of spacetime indicated its dimensional engines were entering operation. In a few moments the entire fortress would vanish and the Slayer’s opportunity would be gone.

A massive slug of infernal metal soared towards the Slayer, but instead of dodging he slightly shifted his position and dug his hands into the shell as it passed, spinning on his heel and, after taking careful aim, slinging it back at the citadel with monstrous force.

The missile blasted through the fortress’s exterior and tore its way through its structure, destroying one of the whirring dimensional engines. The multitude of Pylons immediately ceased firing their railguns to focus on their ocular cannons, but it was too late. The Slayer grabbed one of the last rail bolts and sent it flying at the remaining dimensional engine, crippling the citadel and leaving it stranded with him and his scorching rage.

With the distance between him and the fortress drawing to a close, the Slayer leapt off from the wasteland with a powerful thrust that shattered the ground before tearing through the eye of a Hellstorm Pylon and smashing his way into the citadel.

The blinded Pylon released a thunderous metallic groan as it crashed through the outer wall of the fortress, falling upon the twisted structures and the many demonic inhabitants within, but the Slayer’s rampage had just begun.

The Slayer crashed through tower after tower, falling through countless levels of complex edifices built up, down, and sideways, brutally crushing every wretched thing he could get his hands on. The residents were short impish creatures that fled in his presence, and before long the Slayer was drenched in purple blood.

He crushed their skulls beneath his feet, thrust his hands into their bodies and pulled out mangled messes of shredded organs, ripped their limbs off and broke their backs on his knee.

His rage knew no limits, and he spared no mercy.

A series of roars in his vicinity drew his attention backwards. A pack of scarlet Blood Knights, with inscribed runes and burning talons, was headed right for him.

They raised their hands and shot blazing streams of Hellfire at the Slayer, but his carnage would not be stopped. He charged through the infernal flames while charging a Blood Punch and released it in the midst of the monsters, feeling cruel satisfaction as their bones cracked beneath his fist. The Blood Knights set great swathes of volume afire and launched exploding fireballs that ate away at his HEALTH, but he didn’t care. He released Blood Punch after Blood Punch directly unto the demons’ faces, sending their brains flying and absorbing their life force to replenish his HEALTH and ARMOR.

HE HATED BLOOD KNIGHTS!!

A howling screech echoed through the gnarled edifices before a lightning-fast shape crashed into the Slayer, picking him up and carrying him as it flew between the structures. It was a Shrike, a biomechanical pterosaur-like demon with smooth black skin and a sleek snout full of needle-like teeth, with which it currently tried to maul the Slayer with. The furious Slayer freed himself by breaking off the creature’s legs and climbed unto its back before savagely punching at the demon’s head. The creature shrieked in anguish and spun in a vain attempt to throw the Slayer off, dispelling a drove of jagged spines from its back and impaling the Slayer, but he punched the Shrike’s head open and ripped out its cerebral unit. He clambered over to the plunging demon’s wing and tore off one of its arm cannons, leaping off and taking aim for the other two Shrikes surreptitiously flanking him. He triggered the arm cannon and shot a howling beam at the nearest Shrike, which exploded in a flaming mess of melted flesh and metal. The remaining Shrike tried to fire its own beams at the Slayer, but even in free-fall he swerved behind an edifice and quickly returned fire, dispatching his last pursuer before the severed cannon ran out of energy.

HE HATED SHRIKES!!

Rapidly approaching the citadel core, the Slayer focused a Blood Punch and released it unto the thick ragged surface in his path, smashing through it and landing in a large spacious chamber filled with a multitude of demons, presumably the citadel court. The crowd swiftly dispersed in a discordant cacophony of screams and howls, but the Slayer turned his gaze towards the citadel ruler, a regal Summoner-class demon lord with flowing gown and an infernal halo suspended behind its disgusting head. It cowered in petrified terror as the Slayer charged with fire in his eyes.

HE HATED DEMONS!!

There was a flash of scarlet lightning and the Slayer went Berserk.

* * *?

Bottomless wells of green sludge where unfortunate souls sank for eternity. Living mountains that devoured entire cities whole and turned fortresses to waste. Terrible, ghastly things snaking between the ruins of shattered worlds.

My soul quivered before the horrendous sights flashing before me. I closed my eyes in an effort to shut them out, but I could not shut out the harsh screams of madness.

The dreadful howling morphed into the sound of air rushing past me, and the nightmare was over. To my wary relief, silence washed over me and I landed on solid ground.

Had I eaten recently, I imagined I would have thrown up, but I managed to shakily bring myself to my knees with little trouble.

I must be getting used to these Hell rifts.

“How are you, soldier? Mission-capable?”

“Yeah, I think I’m okay.”

I looked around to survey my surroundings. I was in some sort of tall interior compound, the rough grey surfaces mottled with thin red growths, probably some kind of plant. The environment was surprisingly well-lit thanks to a pale light that descended from ceiling channels, far clearer than the previous locations I’d been in.

But there was a peculiar sensation in my chest. The atmosphere here was worryingly heavy, and I felt a low thrumming reverberate through the world. It wasn’t completely silent, but I couldn’t spot any enemies or other creatures in this enclosed environment. There was virtually no line-of-sight either.

I’m sure I’ll find them later on. That’s how it always goes.

“Just take deep breaths, stay cool. You got this. Keep your fingers on your triggers and…don’t forget to look twice before you cross, understood?”

“Copy that,” I whispered in response, switching to my Skullfire spell and priming my machine guns before taking a single step, stopping when I heard a squelching splash.

I slowly looked down to find myself stepping in a puddle of red liquid with sinews of floating masses. I turned to the grey walls and took a second look at the growths.

“Ohhh, God. It’s not plants.”

* * *?

The Doom Slayer lay on his back in the infernal wasteland, the sounds of the collapsing citadel rumbling around him as thunder echoed in the distance. The acts of destroying the fortress and massacring its inhabitants had provided enough catharsis to appease his rage, at least for the moment, and he felt merely upset now.

He stared blankly at the sanguine sky, taking a moment to collect his thoughts and analyze the situation.

He’d landed on The Shores of Hell, the outermost of Hell’s three spheres.

Obviously, since The Abyss was inaccessible from the Mortal Realm i.e. his universe, and Tartarus was…well, Tartarus.

Nothing got in. Nothing got out.

But that didn’t help at all. The Shores was the largest of Hell’s spheres, the one populated by consumed mortal worlds, their corrupted peoples, and most native demonic beings, intelligent or not.

And he didn’t recognize this particular region he’d landed in. Which was strange, considering the AGES he’d spent in Hell prior to being imprisoned. Many things must have changed in his absence. He could be anywhere.

Even more frustrating was that he had no way of returning to Mars…shit, he had no way of returning to his universe on his own!

The Praetor Suit had no interdimensional drive, meaning he’d have to hijack some other Hellgate just to return, and even then it might not drop him in 2149. ‘Time’ was a native quality of the Mortal Realm, it did not exist in higher planes of existence. Travel between the Mortal and Immortal Realms was simply not meant to happen. He could spend another eternity in Hell and arrive in Mars five minutes after he left, or he could take a magically-appearing portal at this very moment and arrive at the beginning of the Solar System…or its end. He could arrive to witness the origin of the universe and exist as a collection of fundamental particles for a couple millennia. Or arrive trillions of years in the future to a universe inhabited only by singularities and black dwarf stars.

Wouldn’t be the first time, either.

Of course, he could take the Fracture portal back to Mars and perhaps even 2149…

…if he only knew where the other side of the Fracture portal was!

The Slayer’s heartbeat spiked with anger once more, and he focused on staying calm.

The Murus Dei separating Hell from the rest of Creation still held. Prevented the exfiltration of even the greatest Infernal powers and, given the circumstances, himself. He might be able to exploit one of his old shortcuts through the Barrier, but again, he didn’t know his current whereabouts, and the nearest drop point he knew of to 2149 Mars was…

Ugh…

This was getting him nowhere! He didn’t want to spend another eternity jumping across worlds and realms to get back to some shithole planet he’d failed to keep his ass on just because of some bloody Cyber Paladin! Earth could become victim to a full-blown invasion in the time he was playing interdimensional hopscotch and getting shitcanned by mere Hell Knights! He needed to get back to Mars NOW!!!

He slammed his fist on the ground, paying no attention to the spreading crack that split the landscape in two.

A sudden wave of realization washed over the Slayer.

He might have been able to hijack the demonic citadel to determine his whereabouts and perhaps even use it for transportation, at least for the time being, had he not completely wrecked it.

That had probably been a poor decision.

A new sound appeared on the horizon. A long, harsh, desolate roar. Basilisks.

The Slayer sighed and sat up.

He might as well get a move on. Basilisks were tough and he was not in the mood to fight even one, especially not with 62 HEALTH. He groaned in irritation and picked himself up.

The Slayer headed deeper into the ruins of the demolished fortress. These constructs always had a Hive Nexus to coordinate their position, travel routes, local dangers and whatnot. If he was lucky and the Nexus wasn’t completely wrecked, he could boost his automap with that.

He brought up his automap as he scoured the citadel’s remains. The divination court. A communion hub. A charred sparking mess that had once been a dimensional engine, before a Cyclone rail bolt was thrown through it.

The Slayer cleared his throat and turned back to his map.

There! A map station icon appeared in his display and he raced to where indicated. Taking great leaps, he cleared a mountain of rubble until he reached a spacious chamber carved from polished stone. The Slayer hurried to the structure in the center, a pool of thick viscous fluid above which floated varying orbs of the same substance, growing, shrinking, and orbiting each other. He lightly poked the swirling liquid with one finger, watching waves of runes spread across the orbs as his automap flashed with an extensively detailed diagram of the region.

Blood Keep? That was new.

It seemed the map covered only the local sector of the region, which the Slayer guessed to be far larger than illustrated. And yup, there were the Basilisks. Big, scaly, and cunning beasts, fond of feeding on consumed planets.

The Slayer took a closer look at his automap.

Strange, he couldn’t find a single planet in the surrounding region. He could see the remains of countless planets – continent-size shards floating in the emptiness, the perfect feeding ground for Basilisks – but not a single complete world in the whole sector. There were a few Parasite Moons in the area but those didn’t count. No Predator Worlds, no Tyrant Stars, no higher powers of any kind.

But there was a Blood Storm nearby. Great.

No permanent forts or signs of intelligent agencies either. There HAD been this citadel, but that was a mobile fortress, and the inhabitants were a scavenger race. Apart from a few wild Hell beasts, the least unconcerning of which were the Basilisks, the region was unusually empty.

Something big had happened here.

A high-pitched roar resonated nearby, and as he switched off the automap, the Slayer spotted a gigantic serpentine shadow slither in the sky behind a floating mountain. A juvenile Basilisk, about a hundred meters long, come to feast on the wrecked citadel.

The Slayer equipped his combat shotgun and turned to the Hellscape, not wanting to get caught in a Blood Storm or between a Basilisk and its prize. The automap indicated a resource stache not too far away, no doubt a temporary shelter from some long-past mortal expedition. He’d salvage what he could from it and figure it out from there.

He pumped his shotgun and raced away into the infernal wastes.

* * *?

Ruby stared in horror at the image of the ruptured Tower on the display monitor.

It was bad enough that the Hellgate was fully open now, allowing into Mars all manner of nightmarish monstrosities, but to make matters worse, the sun had gone down and night had fallen.

Their chances of survival had gone down to practically zero.

“Agent!”

Ruby had already noticed. A ring of teleporter pods throughout the lobby whirred into operation around them.

“MOVE!”

“Wait! Our helmets!”

“LEAVE THEM!”

The group raced down the hallway into the Helix Labs as the possessed soldiers warped into the chamber and released Hellish roars. She provided cover fire with her pulse rifle to let the others hurry away as the demons started shooting.

“GET TO THE HANGAR! IT’S ON THE EAST END!”

Reeves, Rogers, and Romero managed to stay ahead of their pursuers and most of the incoming projectiles at a brisk sprinting speed, but Harrison was lagging behind and before long fell back to Ruby’s position.

“Christopher! You need to hurry!”

“I can’t! Aaah! My legs!”

Ruby looked down at the scientist’s legs. There were glowing runes perforating into his suit’s white plating, and she could see blood dripping through the cracks.

“No! NOOO!”

Ruby charged a power blast and released the crackling orb at the demons. The orb exploded on impact and reduced a half dozen soldiers into steaming fluids smeared on the walls. She pulled the trigger again to fire on the remaining demons but the rifle didn’t respond, the trigger repeatedly clicking with no reaction. Grunting in frustration, she slung the firearm and bent down to hoist Harrison on her shoulder.

“Don’t worry, Christopher. I’m getting you out of here. Romero! Rogers! Help us!”

The two men turned around and hurried to assist the two stragglers but then they raised their weapons at a point behind Ruby.

“Look out!”

Ruby heard the telltale screech of imps behind her.

She pulled out her EMG with her right hand as she carried Harrison with her left, and desperately fired at the loathsome creatures while hurriedly shambling towards safety, trying to avoid the fireballs flying through the corridor at them.

A sudden flash of cold fear pierced through Ruby’s head, and she shut her eyes in an effort to drown out the mocking voices.

“AAAAHH!” Harrison yelled in pain and fell out of Ruby’s grip.

“Christopher!”

Harrison’s left foot was gone, the charred stump smoking where a fireball had pierced through the weakened armor and gone through flesh and bone. Ruby saw the desperate supplication in the elderly scientist’s eyes as he stared up at her with imps gaining on him, fangs dripping and eyes lurid.

“Agent!”

Ruby vaguely moved in the direction of the injured scientist, but in a split-second the pack pounced on him and she could only see blood flying through thrashing demon limbs.

“CHRISTOPHER!”

“Look out, Taylor!” Rogers appeared at her side and pulled her away. Harrison’s arm was visible through the flailing horde, holding a primed frag grenade.

She reflexively fell to the floor.

BOOM!!

The explosion left her ears ringing and she hazily looked up, trying to gather her bearings through the smoke and ashes.

The voices had vanished. Thick black blood ran down the walls and dripped from the ceiling, and scattered across the room were rune-scarred plates of armor, which had once belonged to a UAC security suit.

No…

“-lor! Taylor! We have to go!”

Ruby heavily picked herself up and absent-mindedly followed the Lieutenant. The fog in her head cleared when she read the sign MAIN HANGAR over an upcoming door.

“There…THERE IT IS!”

The gate slid open as they approached, and the team raced towards the lone shuttle parked in the hangar, a dim chamber with a glass ceiling that revealed the Martian night sky. Clambering up the craft’s steel ladders, they rushed through the open entry port and Ruby went straight to the pilot cabin.

“Everyone fasten your seatbelts! We’re taking off now!”

Ruby performed the preflight startup sequence and powered the shuttle up but stopped immediately when she read the message displayed on the dashboard, her blood running cold as ice.

No, God. Please, God. No.

ERROR: SHUTTLE CANNOT BE LAUNCHED

PRIMARY AIR CONTROL NETWORK UNAVAILABLE

FOREIGN SIGNAL INTERFERING WITH NAVIGATION SYSTEMS

TRACING ANOMALY…

ORIGIN: LAZARUS LABS --> LAZARUS REFRACTOR

* * *?

I rolled my fingers across the corner of the corridor and cautiously peeked around the corner. Nothing.

I stepped around the corner and carefully walked on the driest surfaces I could spot poking through the surface of the…warm liquid that covered most of the floor.

Thank God I can’t smell anymore.

?

Small moist masses disgustingly plopped from holes in the walls onto the puddles that had accumulated throughout the place, but I was careful to not make any additional noise in that horrendous place. I didn’t know what might be listening.

“ROOOOAAAAHHHH!”

I instantly froze.

“Don’t talk,” whispered Colonel Johnson into my ears. Or brain, or something. “I’m taking scans of this place. There’s definitely something big moving nearby, but the place is a maze and the readings are all scrambled. Go through that door on your left. NOW.”

I obeyed without hesitation, splashing across the wet floor and ducking under a low doorway that immediately took a sharp left, then a right, as it led into a narrow hallway lit by sickly yellow ceiling fixtures. As soon as I entered the passage, I heard something heavy turn the corner I’d been in not ten seconds earlier and loudly splash across the liquid. There were legs. Many legs.

Something small silently crawled out of a hidden recess in the wall and I stepped on it out of reflex, making a loud splat as I crushed tissue and bone.

OH FU-

“Hurrrr.”

I stood as still as my shivering limbs would allow, hearing whatever was out there stop right outside the tunnel entrance. It softly growled and took several deep sniffs of the doorway, but it didn’t pass through.

Please, let it be too big to pass through the doorway.

Wait. No, WAIT.

After a horrifying amount of time, the thing snapped its jaws and continued roaming outside, its footsteps echoing and fading into silence.

How many legs is that? ... Well, it’s definitely more than four. Probably not greater than ten. Ohhh…

“I think it’s gone now.”

“Please tell me that I can reach a teleporter without having to go back out there.”

“There’s a gate apparatus at the center of the maze, but this tunnel doesn’t go all the way.”

I sighed in desperation.

“What you can do is check out the end of this hallway. It could be a dead end, but you might find something useful.”

I looked down at the creature I had crushed with my foot. It was like an overgrown spider with many spindly legs and a large central body, now splattered across the floor, that almost seemed made up entirely of brain tissue. I couldn’t spot anything that might have been an eye or mouth in the low light.

This one hadn’t been much of a threat, but the sound it made…I had to be careful.

The corridor remained surprisingly linear as it meandered within the maze’s wall, with no branching paths despite the frequent turns, but I kept a watchful eye for anything that might jump out from the shadows. I switched to my flak cannons and brandished the Bronze Spear, ready for anything.

“AAAAHHHH!”

A horrid creature, like a floating snake-like humanoid with short spikes for arms and a gaping lamprey-like maw, suddenly appeared from behind a corner. I immediately opened fire and thrust my spear into the monster, which lowly groaned before being reduced to a splattered mess on the wall.

“God DAMN…,” I whispered while breathing heavily.

I collected myself and continued, taking care not to rush around corners before arriving at a dead end.

At least, the corridor came to a stop and there were no doors or further paths I could take, but I just stood trying to comprehend what lay before me.

On the wall at the very end of the hallway was a pulsating mass of flesh and slime. It was like a giant fleshy starfish, countless vines splitting into further branches which snaked across the adjacent walls, floor, and ceiling. These vines were acting as vessels of some sort, softly throbbing and channeling fluid towards the structure at its center, a collection of small fleshy orbs.

I gagged and turned to leave.

“Hold on, wait! I’ve read about this! This is some sort of parasite nest!”

“What’s…ugh, what’s this got to do with me?”

“Those things in the center are blood-sucking leeches! They adhere to a host and usually feed on their blood, but when Argent energy is applied to them, they can draw blood from other creatures at a distance!”

“Why would I want…”

I thought back to the pale Tree, and how my chassis was restored from the blood sap the Tree had accumulated from its victims.

“Okay, I think I’m getting it.”

“Yeah, if you apply your core energy, you can use one of these suckers to heal your injuries.”

The small orbs gently quivered within their nest, producing wet squelching sounds.

“You said these are parasites?”

“The company ran some tests, and apparently they can survive just fine on siphoned blood.

Use your spear and pry one off. GENTLY. You don’t want to disturb the whole nest.”

I raised my spear and softly poked one of the squirming leeches on the outermost edge of the nest, which promptly released a sharp hiss. I forced down my revulsion and pressed on.

Using the tip of the Bronze Spear, I slowly eased the tiny leech from its nest. It was attached to the wall by thin curling ligaments, which combined with its gelatinous body and underbody mouth, gave it the appearance of a tiny red octopus.

“Disgusting. What do I do with this now?”

“Are you left-handed or right-handed?”

“Right.”

“Place it on the palm of your left hand. With some luck, it’ll bond to it and let you siphon blood from demons if you apply some Argent energy.”

I took another look at the wretched thing on the end of my spear. Its tendrils wiggled slightly in the air as it no doubt searched for something living to stick to. I guessed I would have to do. I would have preferred to keep such a thing as far away as possible or to squish it beneath my foot, but the ability to heal my injuries was too good to pass up.

And it’s not like there were medpacks in Hell.

I brought the end of the Bronze Spear closer and I reached out with my left hand, onto which the leech promptly leaped on and bit into.

It hurt.

“AAAAAAHHHHHH!”

I could feel the leech tearing at my hand with its mouth and digging its tendrils in. There were splatters of blood.

My blood.

My vision began to erode into a field of static as my head fell victim to a mind-splitting migraine. The static melted away to reveal a horrific skeletal arm, lacking skin, tissue, and implanted with metallic implements. Amid the twisted bony fingers, a ravenous leech dug into what remained of flesh in the palm of the hand.

My hand…!

“Huh?”

I found myself clutching at my arm on the floor.

What…what am I doing here? What just happened?

I glanced around at the dim sickly corridor as I gathered my bearings.

God, these lapses feel like they’re getting worse. I hope my head doesn’t glitch in the middle of a fight.

“Soldier? Soldier, come in.”

It was Colonel Johnson’s voice over the radio.

“Colonel! Yes, reporting!”

“Are you okay, soldier? I lost you there for a second.”

“I…I don’t know what happened. My head kind of aches.”

“What’s the last thing you remember?”

“The last thing?”

I turned to the pulsating fleshy mass on the wall. Had I come into contact with it?

“I’m…I’m not sure. I recall just walking along this tunnel. I think there were bugs here. Big ones.

Ugh, my memory’s not getting any better. It might just be getting worse. What happened to me, Colonel?”

“Hell’s messing with your wires, John. Your chassis is tough but it won’t protect you forever, you’ve got to get out of there. Follow what I tell you and you’ll be back home soon, I promise.”

I grabbed my spear and was about to leave when I caught sight of a diagram on the stone wall. A square layout of parallel and perpendicular lines, almost like a maze, roughly sketched onto the wall.

Wait a minute, is that THIS maze?

Perhaps, but the structure was bafflingly complex and didn’t seem to follow any sort of logic or reason. To me it just seemed a mindless mess of lines and crosses, although which occasionally resembled familiar letters or numbers. An “H,” a “2,” the entire northeast corner even resembled a complete “1337,” but that was probably just me trying to make sense of random scribbles.

I sighed and headed back out the narrow winding hallway.

“Soldier?”

“Copy that. One more thing: did…did something happen to my hand? I think I remember you telling me something about…blood? And Argent?”

“I’ve just finished running some diagnostics on your systems. Your left hand’s Hemokinetic Field module is up and running.”

“That sounds important.”

“I should hope so. Spend a little of your core’s Argent energy to siphon enemy blood and repair your injuries? Courtesy of the Union Aerospace Corporation. Doesn’t get much better than that.”

Reaching the end of the corridor which opened back onto the chamber, I slowly peeked around the corner. There was something at the far end of the channel. I briefly caught sight of a huge and pale slug-like shape staring dead at me before rushing away with its many legs.

“Of course, results in the field may vary.”

“I can’t stay here for too long, Colonel. Get me to the next portal. I need to keep moving.”

“Copy that.”

* * *?

The Doom Slayer soared into the sanguine sky, leaping off from one dark continental shard floating in the emptiness to the next. The sponge-like fragments were riddled with massive holes and tunnels, the work of Basilisks feeding on the remains of countless worlds, and the Slayer kept a sharp lookout for any sudden movement. He could deal with demons slashing or shooting at him, but the experience of being swallowed whole had always been an exceedingly unpleasant one.

He would have preferred to navigate the region with the Praetor Suit’s Inertia Drive. That way he wouldn’t need to expend conscious power and focus to manipulate the abstract environment for the mere act of traversal, but he made do with his jump pack.

He disliked flying. Moving without the use of his legs always felt so unnatural. The firm sensation of ground beneath his feet, even the unholy grounds of Hell, was far more preferable.

Looking down from the summit of a yawning precipice, he could see a river of blood snaking through a forest of dark boney trees at the base of the sheer mountainside, where the automap indicated the resource stache. He leapt off the cliff and slid down the surface, coming to a halt at the place marked by his automap.

?

The Slayer raised his eyebrows.

He’d been expecting a meager shelter constructed by some unfortunate travelers, maybe some simple sigils to keep local beasts away.

He was not expecting a small fleet of black rune-inscribed dropships stationed beneath the cover of a Hellish forest, and certainly not ships bearing the UAC logo.

He’d never seen these kinds of UAC ships before. There were five small craft, some twenty meters long, positioned in a ring around what was a makeshift camp. There were runes of protection etched on the vessel’s hulls to shield the camp from the infernal elements, as well as runes of concealment to hide them from most unwanted sights.

The Slayer could tell the protection runes weren’t properly implemented, which explained the dead bodies inside the camp and the twisted figures outside of it, but they would have lasted long enough to enable a small expedition. And although long since destroyed, there were the remains of space-time continuum generators to maintain a bubble of reasonably stable space-time.

It was almost impressive.

He grabbed his .45 pistol and casually fired at the once-human atrocities shambling towards him, horrific contortions of flesh and bone. Some retained a vague humanoid shape but wore their thin sinewy skin like a veil over their seared flesh and liquefied factions, multiple extraneous limbs reaching for him. These were merely Damned, those who had lost themselves to Hell’s power and retained no semblance of intelligence, condemned to wander the wastes for all eternity. But there were also Apostates, engorged figures who carried within the capricious souls of those they had condemned.

These groaned at the sight of the Slayer and painfully shuffled towards him, desperate to be freed from their torment. The Damned fell with a single bullet to the head and crumbled into ash on the ground but the Apostates exploded on death and released swarms of Ricti, black Lost Souls that spat fireballs at the Slayer. The Slayer took care to avoid the incoming projectiles as he eliminated the creatures with little heed.

The Slayer expected munitions and other supplies inside the camp, but he left two Damned alive in case he needed to restock with his chainsaw.

Entering the camp’s protected perimeter, the first thing the Slayer did was head for the autocannon mounted on the fallen heavy infantry mech at the edge of the camp. He cautiously studied the weapon’s structure before ripping it from the mech’s hands, watching as his Praetor Suit retrofitted its components into something he could manually fire.

DELTA-12 30 MM CHAINGUN ACQUIRED

MUNITION TYPE – BULLETS

PRIMARY FIRE – AUTOMATIC FIRE AFTER SPINNING UP TO FULL SPEED

SECONDARY FIRE – NONE

NOTE: ROUNDS FIRED ARE PIERCING AND INCENDIARY; EACH ROUND COSTS 2 BULLETS

This. Now this was a weapon, thought the Slayer as he contemplated the weight of the gun in his hands, a wicked grin spreading inside his helmet. His rocket launcher worked just fine, but there were few sensations more satisfying than the recoil of a machine gun and the sound of raining lead. Or tungsten, in this case.

Putting his new tool away into his Suit’s storage matrix for the time being, the Slayer entered the main settlement, noticing the remains of another four mechs. Clearly not enough for this ill-fated expedition. He climbed aboard the nearest of the wrecked ships, curious to see if there was anything he could do with the interdimensional drive.

Well, the Slayer thought as he looked over the defunct apparatus, the drive had certainly once been mid-twenty-second-century state-of-the-art UAC technology, but Hell’s reality had corrupted its components beyond recognition. The drive was covered with a thick layer of blackish rust etched with gnarled symbols and nail scratch marks, and its insides were a fused mess of amalgamated wiring.

His Praetor Suit… It itself may be damaged, but was there anything his Praetor Suit could do?

He kneeled closer to the corroded drive and ran a deep systems scan with the Suit.

RUNNING ANALYSIS…PROCESSING…

ANALYSIS COMPLETE: FAILURE

DRIVE IS TOO CORRUPTED TO REPAIR OR REVERSE ENGINEER

The Slayer briefly hesitated before punching the drive in frustration.

He stepped outside of the ship and contemplated what to do next when he began to hear a low whispering. Nothing unusual, considering his whereabouts, but he could hear faint words and lines of human dialogue. It must have been the impressions of the human travelers, imprinted into the physicopsychic Hellscape. The Slayer widened his senses, focusing on the ghostly images of the UAC workers coming into view.

There were a few dozen figures performing various tasks such as unloading cargo from the ships, mounting equipment for operation, standing guard in various weaponized mechs. The majority of the travelers were workers, their envirosuits etched with personal sigils of protection, but there were also a number of strange robotic figures among them.

They looked like Hayden. Their color scheme was black-and-red instead of white-and-blue, they had Hellish sigils blazing on their chests, and a demonic outline with clawed hands and sharp edges, but they bore uncanny resemblance to the Martian Director. What were they? Cyborgs? Robots? Or something else? The Slayer quickly glanced around the camp for any sign of these figures. They were nowhere to be found.

Putting them out of his mind for the time being, the Slayer focused on the four human guards dressed in red armor among the travelers, keenly watching over the settlement in combat gear and carrying…what the hell were they carrying?

Those weren’t firearms the Slayer was familiar with; they were glossy black rifles with angular faceted surfaces and multi-pronged barrels. Were those some new type of plasma gun? They were branded with the UAC logo and clearly made for human hands, but the Slayer wondered if they too were reverse-engineered from Hellish artifacts.

Extracting infernal Argent energy, cybernetically augmenting demons, intentionally demonizing humans, even creating weaponry from Hell technology. What else was the UAC doing? What was the goal of all this?

Was this the work of the Lazarus Project?

With a furious scowl, he turned his attention to what the travelers were saying.

“Continuum generators online. Camp-wide Hayden Field up and running at ninety-nine point seventy-eight percent capacity.”

“Doctor Hayden won’t accept those parameters.”

“It’s within the margin of error, it’s acceptable.”

Wait, Hayden had accompanied this expedition?

The Slayer turned to the rest of the camp to search for Hayden when he spotted his cybernetic frame standing head, shoulders, and chest above the others, beneath the shadow of a sixth ship that had been parked at the center of the camp. He was taller than the Slayer expected, a full three meters in height from head to toe.

Arrogant asshole.

“Doctor Hayden, all preparations are complete. The camp is secure. Standing by for your orders.”

“Are the field generators fully operational?”

“There is slight variation in the Calabi-Yau manifold output, but it’s within the margin of error.”

“There is no margin of error for this operation. I trust the generators will be operating at maximum capacity by the time I return.”

“Of course, Director.”

“Echo Squad,” Hayden spoke as he turned away from the worker, “get to the command ship and begin Phase Two. We head to the tomb at once.”

Tomb? What tomb?

The faint reflections of Hayden and two of the red guards stepped aboard the sixth ship and vanished, but the Slayer was affixed on the object that had lay hidden behind Hayden’s frame. His focus returned to the present, and the rest of the travelers’ impressions faded into silence.

It was a sword. A white longsword with a thick crossguard, black edge, and cracked blade, embedded into the ground in the center of a vivid blue bonfire. The sapphire flames gently lapped and rolled against the blade and hilt, but these suffered no harm. It was Purefire, a cleansing force whose rival was that which blazed across the Hellscape, but the Slayer was focused on the Argenta longsword, recognizing the campsite as the final resting place of a Night Sentinel warrior.

And he would know, for it was he who’d laid them to rest.

The memories of him holding the broken bodies in his arms as he shouted at the Heavens in anguish flooded his mind, and his endless fury became marred with a long-forgotten sorrow, and a guilt as sharp and piercing as the sword before him.

When Argent D’Nur fell, it was he who tracked down his fallen Sentinel brothers, scattered across Hell by devilish treachery, and laid their bodies to rest.

Every last one. Because the one responsible for their deaths was him.

The Slayer approached the sword, ignoring the Purefire scorching through his armor and searing at his soul. He reached out and hesitated before placing his hand upon the pommel.

To his surprise, the sapphire flames immediately siphoned into the blade and passed into his outstretched hand before being absorbed by his body. His HEALTH rose from 62 to 100 and the bonfire vanished to leave nothing but the faintly glowing sword smoldering in the ground.

Just as he pondered what had happened, a new apparition manifested before him, one even paler and more ethereal than those of the UAC workers he’d witnessed.

It was the spirit of the fallen Night Sentinel. The spirit said nothing, standing calmly before the Slayer.

He recognized the distinct presence of the warrior. Gor had been his name, soldier of the 31st? Legion, obstinate and relentless till the end. After breaking his blade on a pack of Hellions, he had slain another two score with his hands before falling.

He remembered them all.

The spirit of Gor then moved, raising an arm to point in a direction far into the distance. The Slayer focused on where the warrior pointed.

His sight fell upon a deceased Black Pyramid hidden away deep within the Blood Keep, a monolithic entity of glass and stone. Devious things which the Slayer vehemently hated, but he spotted the exceedingly powerful seals of containment – now broken – placed over the Pyramid, and the UAC ship docked at a breach in its surface. The sixth ship!

The Pyramid must be the tomb for whatever Hayden had personally come to Hell looking for, and whatever portal mechanism they had established must be how the cyborg returned to the mortal universe. If Hayden had returned, then so could he.

The spatial coordinates must be set to Mars and the temporal coordinates must likewise be sometime recent. He might be wrong, or the portal might no longer be functional, but it was leagues better than nothing.

The Slayer brought his focus back to his location and the spirit of Gor. The fallen warrior placed a fist over his heart in salutation before lightly bowing his head and vanishing. His HUD pinged with an automap notification. He opened the region map to find the Black Pyramid marked at the other end of the sector. His new objective.

With newfound purpose, the Slayer quickly turned around and hurried throughout the camp, picking up serviceable supplies while his Praetor Suit synthesized ammo from any viable resources. Plasma cells, bullet belts, a case of rockets, fresh grenades and mines, and a full stock of batteries for the chainsaw. Most of the workers’ armors were too corrupted to be of use, but one of the infantry mechs had just enough plating to reward the Slayer with 75 ARMOR, and a combination of medical supplies and natural Argent energy deposits boosted his HEALTH to 153.

Restocked, recharged, and with a new heavy weapon in his arsenal, the Slayer turned to the two Damned he’d left wandering outside the camp. He pulled out his new D12 chaingun and spun the barrels up, taking aim at the Damned.

He paused for a moment, focusing on the whirring of the weapon and the vibration of its motor, before changing his mind and taking his finger off the trigger. He put the chaingun away and instead killed the Damned with a Blood Punch.

* * *?

“Colonel, where’s that big thing?”

“Eh…your location’s structure is interfering with the readings, I can’t get a clear lock. It doesn’t seem like its following you yet, but it damn certain knows you’re there.”

“Affirmative.”

I took careful steps across the ankle-deep pools of that cursed place, ever wary of invisible pits beneath the murky fluid or of shapes that may suddenly leap out from the many branching tunnels. I focused on not staring for too long into those dark halls or into the ground material slowly oozing out from channels in the walls.

There was the sound of splashing echoing around the corner. I carefully peeked around to find a horrendous thing – like a hunched long-limbed skeleton covered with hanging strips of bloody sinews – violently thrashing across the puddles and snapping at a small spider-like critter desperately hopping away. I leaned myself a bit further for a better view and the larger creature immediately turned and stared in my direction. Its head was devoid of eyes with only two empty sockets piercing through my soul, and I noticed the long sharp beak attached to its bony head. In fact, with its low hunched stature, clawed feet, and long sinewy arms that resembled wings, the thing was not unlike some sort of hellish vulture.

“AAAAAARRRRRRGGGGGGHHHHHH!”

Its harsh shriek brought me to full alert and I jumped out from behind the corner with spinning machine guns and hands ready to throw fireballs. I opened fire on it but it rushed out of the way with surprising speed, clinging to the walls with its long bony limbs and splashing liquid to throw off my aim. It swung its arm and threw the hanging sinews in my direction, the fleshy rinds striking hard as bullets and prompting my overshield to trigger.

“Ugh! Vulgar piece of-!”

I readied a fireball and threw it at the thing, which hit its mark and set it on fire. The creature howled and thrashed as it splashed across the puddles trying to put itself out, but the sinister flames only spread across its hanging viscera and engulfed it entirely. Grimacing in disgust, I readied another fireball and launched it at the creature again. The fireball hit and the thing burst apart into bony fragments burning throughout the dark puddles, its head bobbing silently on the surface.

“Hissssss…”

A malicious hissing drew my attention above and behind me. There was something fluttering through the air close to the ceiling, but it was concealed in the shadows and I couldn’t spot it.

“AAAHHH!”

A glob of green slime suddenly struck me from in the direction of the hissing. It sizzed on my overshield and hardened into a scaly crust before flaking off, restricting my movement while on my chassis.

“Damn you!”

I switched to my flak cannons and blindly into the shadows while throwing fireball after fireball at the ceiling. It wasn’t long before something got hit and dropped lifelessly to the puddles.

“Aoooo…”

The new sound echoed all around and sent shivers up my spine. It was a dozen of those wicked figures I’d seen earlier, snake-like with stubby arms and round gaping mouths, slowly floating out of the hallways as far as I could see. They were scraggy and thin, but their numbers were concerning and the mob was not backing down. The one nearest to me growled menacingly and I could see flames rising through its maw.

“OooOH SHI-!”

I triggered my dash jets to move out of the way of the fireball, but it curved through the air and struck my overshield. It turned red and I realized I couldn’t take many more hits.

“John! Get out of there!”

I switched to machine guns and opened fire on the mob with piercing rounds, backing away rapidly to dodge the slow but tracking projectiles they spat.

“Above you!”

I looked up to find a swarm of small round creatures flutter out from recesses in the ceiling. They had leathery skin, small finger-like protrusions on their undersides, and a long smoking snout filled with wide flat teeth. Their swollen bodies had no other features and they almost resembled disembodied heads.

I recognized them as the creatures like the one that had spat the green slime at me, so I switched to my longer-ranged missile launchers and launched several volleys at the approaching swarm while hurrying away deeper into the maze. Another glob struck me and my overshield burst with a shockwave that knocked the closest creatures back, but the rest kept advancing and I took several hits directly to my body. The slime burned and slowed me down while the fireballs blasted through my chassis.

“AAAHHH!”

“Your Hemokinetic Module! Use it to heal your wounds!”

Of course! That blood-siphoning thing that Colonel Johnson had brought online! I held my left hand out and channeled my mana into it, watching in amazement as crackling scarlet beams burst from my fingers and electrified the nearest floating creature. The thing groaned as blood was ripped from its body and was focused through the beam to me, mending my wounds and repairing my chassis.

“Sweep the beam across them! It’ll stun them that way!”

My mana was running low but I did as the Colonel ordered, sweeping the beam across the horde while sprinting away. All the beasts struck by the beam halted momentarily as scarlet bolts arced across their bodies, giving me time to back away and steal their blood simultaneously.

My mana was out but I was fully restored.

I switched back to my machine guns but this time toggled to explosive rounds and opened fire on the mob. The machine gun configuration had much faster projectiles and firing rate than the missile launchers, thinning the horde out much quicker.

Suddenly my guns stopped shooting.

“Huh? What’s happening?”

“Your machine guns’ ammo pools are dry! They have to regenerate! But your mana is coming back!”

“Hell yeah! Let’s light these bastards up!”

I primed my hands in preparation for a flame wave and was about to release the spell when a haunting bellow echoed through the halls.

“ROOOOAAAAHHHH!!”

Immediately the multitude dispersed in a dozen different directions, with the flying critters hurrying away to recesses in the ceiling while the floating beasts slowly fled down the many corridors.

“Johh, the big thing’s moving! It’s headed right for you!”

“WHAT THE- WHERE IS IT? WHERE DO I GO?”

“-straight ahead! Turn around! Go back! Go back!”

I stood still for a few moments in utter confusion before I heard the sound of heavy splashing ahead and spotted something large and pale in the distance rushing down the tunnel straight for me.

Failing to even shout in mind-numbing terror, I simply turned around and ran for dear life. Everything became a ceaseless blend of identical corners and hallways, and the sounds of splashing, roaring, and Colonel Johnson’s profane shouting all blended together into a cacophony of madness.

There was a gate! An actual door sealing off a section of the maze! I didn’t know if the gate could be opened but the splashing was getting closer, and the door seemed just low enough to allow me to enter. Beneath the splashing I could hear the panting of whatever was chasing me.

Something landed on the puddles not far behind, then something else to my right. Without warning, something struck my back and brought me to a lurching halt.

“Oof!”

I turned around to find a mass of thick mucus sticking me to the ground and completely preventing my escape. I tore at the mass with my hands but it was almost completely solid.

“ROOOOAAAAHHHH!!”

Desperate, I pulled my knife out and slashed at the ropey tendrils. It worked. I freed myself from my bindings and continued to run like hell.

I was almost there, just a bit further. I used my dash jets to zigzag while running as something kept spitting mucus in my direction. I primed my machine guns ready to blast the gate apart but astoundingly it slid open as I approached.

“Uggghhh AAAAAAHHHHHH!!”

I fired my dash jets and soared through the opening with outstretched arms. I lost my balance in the leap and landed hard on my arms, sliding across the floor a considerable distance but I’d made it.

The gate slid shut behind me.

SLAM!

Something heavy crashed against the door, sending tremors through the floor and rattling my vision, but the gate did not break or open.

“ROOOOAAAAHHHH!”

I looked up in search of an escape route. Nothing. There were intricate sculpted patterns on the walls to contrast from the mostly plain corridors outside but the room was a dead end.

I was trapped.

SLAM SLAM! SLAM!

Whatever was outside was clearly pissed off and trying desperately to break in, but I guessed I was safe for the moment. The thing growled and I heard its heavy footsteps slink away, but I knew better than to go outside and check.

Struggling to calm down, I heavily picked myself up as my heart raced inside my chest.

Guess this tin man’s still got a heart.

All right, let’s consider our options. Small room, dead end. Big angry thing outside. Probably too big to take down before it eats me…if I can take it down at all, that is. This is Hell, the thing might decide it doesn’t give a shit about bullets.

I sighed and slumped against the wall.

What about spells? Flame wave hits har- no, same thing. Don’t know if I can hurt the thing at all. I could just be throwing spitballs before it catches up to me.

Ugh…I’m screwed.

I half-heartedly slammed the wall in exhaustion, which to my surprise moved under the pressure from my hand.

“What?”

I turned to where my hand had landed. It seemed like an ordinary section of wall with the same repeating rectangular pattern…

No. No, it’s not repeating!

Standing up straight for a better look, I realized that the sculpted patterns were actually thin rectangular structures that made up the surface of the room’s walls, minus the floor, ceiling, and the wall containing the entry gate. Although attached to the walls, the pieces were mobile and could be slid across the surface.

“What is this, some kind of control panel? A lock, maybe?”

I took my hands off the pieces since I didn’t know what would happen if I changed their layout, and turned to the wall opposite the entry door. It looked identical to the other two; square with parallel and perpendicular lines which occasionally resembled-

“My God! It’s the square diagram from the tunnel!”

It was the marked scribbles that I’d seen earlier inside that low tunnel. The wall was almost a perfect recreation, except some of the pieces were off. Some of them were twisted the wrong way or placed on other parts of the maze.

Wow, I can…remember that etching perfectly. Wish I could remember literally anything else too.

Something roared in the tunnel behind me. I sure as hell wasn’t going back out now. But perhaps, I could go further in.

“Are you sure you wanna be messing with that?”

“Got no other choice.”

All right. This piece went the other way, I thought as I twisted one of the components on the wall to resemble the maze back in the tunnel.

This thing…gotta slide it over here. This part resembled an “H” … And these three pieces were interlocked.

“Don’t forget the section in the left middle, the one that looked like a 2.”

“Oh right, right.”

I slid those pieces and stood back. Nothing happened.

“…Hmm.”

“You sure you got the whole thing right?”

“I…it looks exactly the same!

Damn! I really thought I had it.”

“What about the northeast corner?”

I looked up. The northeast corner was fine-

“Ugh. I missed the part that looks like a 1337.”

“‘Exactly the same,’ was it?”

“Shut up.”

I reached up to organize the last corner.

1. 3. 3… 7.

All the components at once sank into the wall as light gleamed between their gaps, and with a deep rumbling the entire wall slid back and slowly rose to reveal a previously hidden space.

“Ohh…OHH.”

The gate opened into a vast chamber that stretched much wider and taller than any other I’d seen within the maze. The chamber was lined with towering statues depicting some race of thin gaunt beings; these had long snake-like abdomens instead of legs, and a peculiar pair of tentacles at their sides that branched into many smaller arms, each with what looked like hands. Their faces were strange but nothing horrific. In fact, all of the statues were sculpted to appear dressed in gowns, these adorned with symbols and other glyphs. But this wasn’t what horrified me.

The whole chamber was littered with the bodies of these beings, each about the size of a person, entire multitudes covering almost every available inch of floor.

“Good Lord in Heaven.”

They were all dead. Even though the statues depicted them as slender creatures, their corpses were dreadfully emaciated and difficult to look at, their eye sockets gaping and their dry skin stretched over their bones. This skin was a nauseating shade of deep purple, although the occasional hues of blue and green hinted they might have been more vivid in life. There were the remains of clothing, tools, and other implements on their bodies and vicinities, and as I looked back at the statues I realized their true nature.

“These…these aren’t demons. They were…”

“Aliens?”

“People. They were a people like us. Maybe not human but, this was a civilization. This was their home. Somehow this whole place, whatever it was, got sucked into Hell whole. With them still in it.”

Colonel Johnson painfully sighed.

“Rest their souls, the poor bastards.”

There were children here too.

I figured they were children, due to their smaller stature and simpler features. In contrast to the grown-ups’ complex branching arms, those of the children were plain with few or no branches, but they still held on to their parents with what few hands they had.

I stopped.

There were three bodies huddled together: two adults and one child. The child cowered against the body of one parent while the other parent held the two within its arms, still trying to shield them with its body and with as many hands it could.

I stared at the sorry sight for a time before I could feel something rising inside me.

Nausea? Horror? No…ANGER.

I was furious. Furious that I was in Hell. Furious that I was trapped in a maze. Furious that an intelligent species, one of who-knows-how-many, fell to this world and their citizens perished with nothing they could do about it, their people still trying to save their children from oblivion.

I clenched my fists, ignoring the pain and the sparking produced.

“-hn! JOHN!”

I sharply gasped.

”Leave it. There’s nothing you can do for them now.”

I heavily sighed. The Colonel was right.

“ROOOOAAAAHHHH!”

Oh yeah, I’m furious at that thing too. Whatever it is.

“What the hell is that?”

“What?” I turned around but noticed immediately what the Colonel meant.

“THAT.”

?

It was an eyeball. A freakish glowing eyeball in the middle of the chamber floating atop a small pedestal, which I could swear had not been there when I entered the room. It was a strange thing a glassy orb the size of a billiard ball with a bright red outside and an intense blue iris, and a faint red shining through the pupil. The eye had a sort of ghostly nature and was somewhat hard to see.

And it was watching me.

I circled around it and the eye tracked my movement. I stopped and turned in the opposite direction, and the eye followed. Whatever it was, this blurry artifact creeped me the hell out.

“I don’t trust that thing one bit, soldier.”

“Neither do I. But I want to know what it is.”

The eyeball began to shine brighter.

“You’re not actually suggesting you’re going to touch that, are you?!”

“It’s either this or that big thing out there.”

“John! Do you not see all these dead bodies surrounding the VERY OBVIOUS OBJECT IN THE MIDDLE OF THE ROOM? Take a wild guess what happened to them!”

“These beings likely died from unshielded exposure to Hell’s reality, something that clearly hasn’t happened to me yet. Whatever that thing is, I can handle it.”

“John, listen to me! You are not invincible! You’re not an unstoppable killing machine, you’re a walking bag of technical problems! A highly experimental, highly unstable and virtually untested combat unit that shouldn’t even have been activated, much less still be alive.

Do you even know where you are, soldier? You’re in Hell! The most dangerous and unpredictable place known to mankind! Do you know what the UAC has documented in their expeditions here?

Beasts that suck your brains out through your nostrils, tar pools that trap you and gradually roast you alive, living crystals that envelop you and keep you alive in never-ending agony! One of the workers that trespassed a safety field was witnessed to be constantly dismembered and regenerated by an unseen force over and over again until they finally abandoned him! You seriously can’t expect to pick up every single thing that grabs your attention and acquire a shiny new power every single time!”

“You’re right, sir,” I said while walking over to the orb, electricity crackling on its surface. “The one stuck here in Hell is me. So the one that ultimately calls the shots is me, no?”

“STOP RIGHT THERE, SOLDIER! YOU ARE DEFYING A DIRECT ORDER FROM YOUR SUPERIOR COMMANDING OFFICER!”

The light from the eyeball was almost blinding.

“With all due respect, sir, I don’t give a damn.”

I stretched my hand out and touched the eyeball.



The spell broke as soon as I came into contact with the artifact, washing me in a wave of terror when I realized it had drawn me in without me even knowing. My vision flickered as my being was thrown through different levels of reality, each one more abstract and less real than the last.

I came to a lurching halt and saw a multitude before me, stoic and impassive in their ageless wait and with minds as strange and alien as their bodies.

They were not like me. They did not recognize me.

The third eyes on their foreheads opened. Bright, glaring things with gazes as cold and piercing as steel, and everything went white.



I opened my eyes to find myself on the floor of the chamber, now empty. The eyeball and bodies were nowhere to be seen.

I coughed in exhaustion.

“Soldier? Are you all right?”

“…Wow. Yeah, I think I am.”

My sight was altered, though. I remained in the same chamber but everything appeared dim and ghostly, as if submerged deep underwater.

“My vision’s screwed but I’m all good.”

I put my hand forward to pick myself up.

I couldn’t see my hand.

I blinked in an attempt to clear my eyes. No, I could see my hand, it appeared translucent and almost invisible, as if made of incredibly clear glass. I turned to the rest of my body. It had the same quality.

“Colonel, you’re getting this, right?”

“Amazing. This is way beyond any cloaking tech I’ve ever seen. Your radiant and reflected energy levels are almost zero! Visible light, infrared, UV, radio, Argent, you name it! They’re practically nothing!”

“Wait, so I’m actually invisible? This is not just X-ray vision?”

“Negative, almost all environmental energy really is passing through you! How…why…? What are these readings I’m getting?

…Disassociation. You’ve become partially disassociated from Hell’s physical reality!”

“What do you mean? Like, phase shifting?”

“Yes! Phase shifting!”

“Not even the Elite Guards back at the Base had access to combat-grade phase shift tech.”

“This might not be an intentional design. It might be a side effect of whatever else that thing did to you. I’m going to run some diagnostics and -”

“Wait, wait. I feel it’s wearing off.”

In a sudden flash, I snapped back to reality and my normal vision returned. I checked to make sure I was in one piece. My chest, my legs, my arms. My hands, with the sharp prongs of the Hemokinetic Module on one palm and a red-and-blue eyeball on the other.

“AAAAAAHHHHHH!!”

The eyeball was on my hand! Embedded in my right hand and staring right at me!

“GET OFF GET OFF GET OFF!!”

In my alarm I channeled some of my mana into my hand. The eye shone and I flashed back into partial disassociation.

The eye…the eye is making me phase shift. Wha- How- Why?

I breathed heavily as I waited for the effect to wear off, which occurred again after a few moments. I grimaced before looking at my right hand, still desperately wishing that what I’d seen was just a hallucination from my rattled brain.

“Uhhh?” I cracked one eye open. The eyeball was still there.

“Ohhh....”

“Is it a bad moment to say ‘I told you so’?”

I spun my hand around. The eye was visible from both sides and kept its gaze on me as I moved it around.

“That’s it.” I pulled the bronze dagger from my waist and raised it above my clenched arm. “I’m cutting the whole damn thing off!”

“WOAH WOAH WOAH STOP!”

I forcefully gripped the knife and brought it down towards my other arm, but I stopped before the blade even touched me. Not out of indecision or because of Colonel Johnson’s insistence, but because the artifact was speaking to me.

“Huh?’

…

“Soldier?”

…

“John, what’s wrong?”

“The eyeball, sir. It’s whispering. I can hear it in my head. It’s talking to me.”

“What’s it saying?”

I could feel a distinct presence acting on my mind, nudging me with thoughts and feelings not entirely my own. Fear, sorrow, loneliness, anger. If it spoke with words and definite language, I could not understand them, but I received vague sensations, feelings, and ideas that revealed its intent.

“Those beings that lived here, they died when their world was absorbed into Hell. Their bodies perished but they somehow managed to… preserve their souls within that orb, that…blur artifact.”

They say that the survivors who tried to escape were killed, killed by a monster that hunted them all down.”

A fleeting image of the creature flashed across my mind. Pinkish-grey skin oozing with slime, with sinew and blood vessels throbbing on the surface. I grimaced.

“It’s the monster. The big monster that’s roaming around this place.

They want revenge. Revenge against the creature that trapped them here and killed their people off.

They’ll lend me their strength. They want to help me.”

The Colonel said nothing. I continued to stare at the eye while ignoring the shivers it gave me, returning the same curious gaze with which it studied me. Strange and alien, but curious nonetheless.

“How do we know we can trust it?”

The eye stared at me for a moment before emitting a peculiar glow.

“Uhhh!”

I winced as a piercing sensation suddenly fell upon my head, not excruciating but a nonetheless uncomfortable feeling accompanied by a shrill whistling noise.

As soon as it appeared the sensation vanished, and my mind felt somehow different, a bit more proper. As if a detached wire had been plugged in or a faulty component fixed. I opened my eyes.

Floating in my visual field were a series of bright digital diagrams like those of a heads-up display. There were three vertical bars in my lower left field of view – blue, red, and green – besides the rough outline of a person.

“Wait. Wait, I know that! That’s a physical integrity display like those on the mechs back at Mars!

Ha ha! That’s me, isn’t it?” I asked the alien eyeball. “That’s my physical integrity!”

The eyeball made a sudden bobbing motion, almost as if it were nodding.

“Ha ha! I thought my augmentations would include some type of heads-up display! Didn’t know why it wasn’t working!

That blue bar must be my overshield, and the red one should be my actual chassis. But what’s the green one?”

There was a small icon besides the green bar, what appeared to be a flaming skull.

“That’s my…that’s my Skullfire spell! That’s my current spell!”

I switched to Flame Wave and the icon changed to a wall of fire. I released the spell into the room and the green bar went down as my Argent energy reserves were used.

“That’s my mana reserves! Sick!”

I was ecstatic that I could finally track my resources instead of gauging them blindly. I turned to the display on my lower right, a set of five orange horizontal bars besides the icon of a machine gun. Curiously, the last two bars appeared darker than the other three.

“That’s my current weapon and ammo pools, but why are the last two bars darker…

The empty weapon modules! I can still add two more weapon systems to my platforms, that’s why!

And what’s this thing?”

The last display was on my upper left field, a circle with a bright center point that produced spreading waves. It reminded me of-

“Radar! That’s my radar device! Or…what is it, Colonel? A motion tracker?”

“Your chassis does include a short-range radar system that tracks nearby movement and maps the local environmental structure, yes.”

“Ha ha! Now we’re cooking with gas!

What do you think, Colonel? Should we keep this thing or not?”

Colonel Johnson remained silent for a moment before finally sighing.

“Your call, soldier.”

I clenched my fists, and the eye gleamed with anticipation.

“Let’s do this.”

* * *?

“Taylor, why the hell aren’t we moving?!”

Rogers’ harsh shouting snapped Ruby back to her senses.

“We’ve got a problem here! Our navigation systems are being jammed! We can’t launch!”

“WHAT?”

The Lieutenant loudly trampled over to the shuttle cabin.

“WHAT DO YOU MEAN WE CAN’T LAUNCH?”

Rogers’ gaze drifted to the error message on the dashboard, standing in stunned silence for several seconds before he managed to respond.

“WHAT THE HELL’S THE MEANING OF THIS?”

“The air control network’s offline and the shuttle’s nav computer is down-”

“ARE YOU SAYING WE’RE STUCK HERE, IS THAT IT?”

Romero stepped into the cabin.

“What’s going on here?”

“WE CAN’T LAUNCH! WE’RE GROUNDED! WE’RE STUCK HERE WITH THOSE THINGS HUNTING US DOWN AND OUR THUMBS UP OUR ASSES!”

An anxious Reeves was drawn in by the commotion.

“Is it true?! We can’t fly?!”

Ruby sighed in exasperation and brought her face down to her hands as her racing thoughts drowned out the raucous sounds of discussion.

If the Base-wide flight network was down there was nothing they could do about it. They might be able to get the shuttle’s computer back online for manual control but only if they removed the source of interference, the foreign signal which jammed its navigation systems.

Which originated in the Lazarus Labs. The source of this entire disaster and without a doubt the most infested sector in the entire planet. They’d be dead long before they even set foot in the Labs.

They’d even left their helmets back at the lab entrance, only Ruby still wore her own. ‘Leave them,’ she said when the demons arrived as they prepared to stretch their legs. It wouldn’t have been a problem had they taken off for the Spaceport, docked with an escape ship and taken off, but that was no longer possible. Their only hope of escape was to head into the heart of enemy territory. Without helmets.

Harrison was dead. She’d seen their dark magic on his legs before he perished; it had passed through his armor and crippled his ability to run.

They exploited his arthritis. Induced it, amplified it. They used it to kill him.

She recalled how her pulse rifle had failed to fire right before his death. She’d dismissed the incident as the clip running empty and there being no time to reload, but curious she brought her firearm over for closer examination.

Ruby’s heart sank when she discovered the clip was not only half full, but that the pulse rifle’s shell was already engraved with several fiery symbols. There were only a few but the corruption would surely spread and get worse. If that incident had simply been a misfire, before long the rifle would become useless, or worse, a hazard to Ruby herself.

No. No, this can’t be happening.

All of them were potential points of failure. Reeves had pulmonary fibrosis, Romero had heart problems, Rogers was a walking powder keg, and Ruby’s entire capacity depended on a flimsy piece of metal and plastic embedded in her brain that was just short of expired. She could feel her focus waning by the second, her mind filling with static like a glass with boiling water.

The team’s equipment was failing. Their bodies were failing, and judging by the deranged shouts behind her, their minds were starting to as well. If they didn’t figure something out, it wouldn’t matter if the demons found them or not, because they’d already be dead regardless.

She had no idea what to do.

“Agent! Agent!”

It was Romero.

“You need to get a word out. Send a message to your command and get immediate evac on our position. Say what you have to, anything it takes! It’s the only way we make it out in time.”

Ruby sighed in defeat as she rested her face on her hand.

“There is no evac,” she quietly muttered.

Romero opened his mouth to respond but abruptly stopped.

“T-there…,” Reeves struggled to enunciate. “T-there is no-”

“WHAT DO YOU MEAN THERE IS NO EVAC?”

Ruby had had enough of Rogers’ attitude. She slammed her hand on the dashboard and stormed up from her chair to reply with a tone as cold and sharp as ice.

“I MEAN THERE IS NO ONE COMING TO GET US BECAUSE THERE IS NO ONE OUT THERE. EVERY HUMAN BEING THAT COULD HAVE HELPED US IS EITHER ONE OF THOSE THINGS OR DEAD.

THE ONLY ONES LEFT ARE VEGA AND THAT BASTARD HAYDEN, WHO WILL UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES ALLOW US TO LEAVE THIS PLANET.

WE ARE, IN EVERY POSSIBLE SENSE, ON OUR OWN.”

* * *?

HERE LIES THE FINAL RESTING PLACE OF THE HELLWALKER, THE WARRIOR KHAN, THE SCOURGE OF HELL

KILLER OF GODS, SLAYER OF TITANS

THE ONE KNOWN AS THE DOOM SLAYER

HE LIES IN THE HEART OF THE BLACK PYRAMID BEYOND, VICTIM TO THE BLACK SACRIFICE THAT SUNDERED COUNTLESS KINGDOMS AND UNTOLD LEGIONS TO CONTAIN HIS INSATIABLE RAGE

MAY THE COST OF SUCH TERRIBLE SACRIFICE BE NOT IN VAIN

MAY SUCH FEARSOME POWER NEVER BE RELEASED

MAY THE DOOM SLAYER NEVER WAKE AGAIN

The Slayer keenly whistled.

That explained a few things.

He stood on a massive artificial construct floating among the dark mountains, its smooth black metallic surface etched with bright green symbols and fissures. Most obvious on the structure was the Slayer’s very own Mark, occupying the greater part of its face and veritably pulsating with the accumulated fear and dread of countless demons.

He frowned and lowered himself to the surface, placing his hand on the glowing Mark with curiosity. The manipulation of psychic energies wasn’t his specialty, but fear was a powerful tool and one that he knew better than to disregard.

He drew the psychic energies accumulated on the construct into his hand, focusing them into a single coherent nexus. The energies congealed and solidified, taking the form of a smooth black totem in the Slayer’s hand, engraved with his own blazing Mark.

NEW BOOST SYNTHESIZED – SLAYER IDOL

FILL MINDS AND HEARTS OF DEMONS WITH BLINDING TERROR

EFFECTS EXPIRE AFTER ONE MINUTE

FABRICATION COST – 7 CALIBRATION CYCLES

The physical manifestation of demons’ fear given form.

Besides the palpable terror imprinted on the marker, the Slayer could again make out the faint whispers of human conversation. He put the totem away into his Suit’s storage and widened his senses once more to make out the impressions of the human travelers.

It was Hayden and the two red guards, who’d landed on the great construct. The cyborg was closely inspecting the inscribed metallic surface while one of the guards tended to their companion, kneeled over in apparent pain. Suddenly, the healthy guard looked up and raced towards Hayden.

“Dr. Hayden! The continuum generators have failed and the camp’s metaphysical integrity has been lost! It’s gone, sir!”

“…The protective runes weren’t properly applied. Our time is running out.”

“What do we do now, sir?”

“Complete the mission. We abandon the camp, head to the tomb. We’ll set up the portal device there.

And leave him,” Hayden gestured towards the dying soldier as he climbed back onto the ship. “He’s useless now.”

“Sir.”

The images faded as the Slayer returned his focus to the now and to the remains of the deceased guard resting on the black metal, now little more than a charcoal-like mass melted onto the marker.

He squinted. There was a small scarlet halo spinning above the chest of the fallen guard. Walking over to it, he discovered it to be a protective sigil surrounding some sort of data chip which had been mounted within the guard’s chestplate. The chip was intact. The Slayer kneeled down and pulled the chip out from what remained of the guard, which trailed ash and a thick viscous substance.

So the red UAC guards had been to Hell, the Slayer mused as he dusted off the chip. They existed in low numbers, supervised a Hell expedition, carried unidentified weaponry, and even answered directly to Hayden, so presumably they were significant figures in Mars’ chain of command.

Sixty-one thousand people dead. A company didn’t get sixty-one thousand workers on a freezing poisonous death planet if they knew they could die at the hands of demons. And sure enough, there hadn’t been indications that the workers knew the true nature of what was happening on Mars, even if they were aware of strange occurrences. He was sure an excuse of “unexplained crossdimensional phenomena” must have placated most inquisitive minds. Shit, he himself had heard that excuse since before Phobos! Back when the UAC first claimed jurisdictional authority over Mars and its moons.

Hayden said the Mars Base provided energy for Earth, which he’d seen via the Argent Tower. The “Altar” to their “Faith.”

Opening the gates of Hell with the key to the future!

Hmmm. The Argent Tower was clearly a critical resource in the UAC’s energy process regardless, which wouldn’t be operated by average workers but special personnel. The “faithful advocates.” Advocates…who were taught about the demons? Recruited for classified experiments? Brought to Hell on manned expeditions? Whatever this faith was, few must have known it existed, with fewer still a part of it.

This Lazarus Project must have been the primary hub for the UAC’s Hell-related research on Mars. Directed by Olivia Pierce, overseen by Samuel Hayden. Without a doubt a highly classified and confidential division into which very few would be granted access, and the red guards were clearly a crucial part of it. The Slayer turned to the data chip in his hand. It resembled a key.

He casually raised an eyebrow and moved the chip into the Praetor Suit’s storage.

All things considered, the Slayer thought as he stood up, it was tremendously astounding that falling into the Martian Fracture had dropped him so close to the precise location in Hell he’d been entombed in. It was even more impressive that the UAC managed to find him, let alone successfully extract him. And Hayden even survived the trip! They could have never carried out this operation with twenty-second century man-made technology alone. The UAC must have come into possession of certainly powerful artifacts.

Someone must be watching over him.

The Slayer coolly dismissed the naive thought to bring up his automap. The display showed the great shadow of a Blood Storm drifting towards the Pyramid, with the Basilisks and other local beasts moving to avoid its path. Meanwhile, the Parasite Moons continued mindlessly drifting through their feeding grounds.

He aloofly scoffed. Blood Storm, Blood Knights, Blood Keep, blood this, blood that. No thanks to Abaddon, the most aggressive Elder God and the dominant power across the Shores of Hell. Devoted to war, senseless slaughter, and the spillage of blood. It was his warriors who most frequently breached into the mortal universe, and he was one of the few beings the Slayer had a personal animosity with.

Not that the other four were much better. He despised the filth which Beelzebub produced and his spawn spread everywhere, and just thinking about M?phisto gave him a headache. Thankfully, the Slayer could tolerate the much more restrained reaches of the last three.

Except for her.

His pulse surged as he recalled her. Penetrating eyes, ensnaring black claws, pearly white fangs, and tender red lacerated flesh. Throbbing with desire, dripping with sin.

The Slayer scowled in disgust.

One day…one day he’d crush the hearts of the Elder Gods and watch the light fade from their eyes.

He turned his attention to the red icons situated around his position as displayed on the automap. A pack of dark and pyroimps would soon pass by the marker as they fled the Blood Storm. A non-concern. A nest of Hellions were also emerging from their nests in the sector’s planetary shards, long and savage demons that reminded him of centipedes.

If centipedes could reach upwards of four meters in length. Ugh.

Bugs were revolting but nothing he couldn’t deal with. Three mancubi slowly but surely closing in.

The Slayer raised an eyebrow.

Mancubi were big but he’d fought bigger. Nevertheless, he began calculating an optimal route he could use to cross the unstable environment.

And a swarm of adult Basilisks headed straight for him.

…Now that might be a problem.

The Slayer switched off the automap and equipped his assault rifle. He’d much rather take a long hot shower in the corrosive rain of a Blood Storm than have to deal with Basilisks, particularly in his currently weakened state. If he moved quickly, perhaps he could lose them in the storm.

But how would he cross it? The Praetor Suit and even his body could resist most of Hell’s destructive metaphysics but Blood Storms were immensely powerful. He’d never make it through unprotected before it killed him, and with a horde hot on his heels he wasn’t going to wait for it to pass. The only reasonable solution he could think of was…ugh. Not going to be pleasant.

He leapt off the marker and soared towards the next dark mountain floating in the sanguine sky, with harsh shrieks echoing behind him. Landing on the shattered landmass, the Slayer broke into a full-blown sprint as the imps arrived at his position. BANG! BANG! BANG! He opened fire but rushed past them without stopping, cleaving a path through their ranks and swerving around their fireballs as he headed for the next edge.

Something was about to emerge from the ground right as his feet. The Slayer charged a Blood Punch and swerved at the last possible second, dodging the leaping attack of viciously clawed Hellion as it emerged from the rocky soil and eviscerating it with the focused blow. POWW! He raced towards the edge of the mountain while strafing to avoid the leaping attacks of a dozen more Hellions and jumped off.

“ROAH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH!”

The Slayer spun around to find the serrated shape of an adult Basilisk, six hundred meters of scale and teeth, slithering through the sky towards him at full speed, its semi-physical body segments appearing and disappearing in sequential fashion as it warped across Hell’s reality. Its great maw, lined with row after row of black spiked teeth and flanked by massive mandibles, was wide open and reaching for him. Crimson bolts of arcane lightning crackled within its throat.

Firing his jump pack at full capacity to force himself out of the beast’s path, The Slayer equipped his rocket launcher as fast as he could and shot a rocket into the Basilisk’s open mouth before remotely detonating it. BOOM!! The rocket exploded against its jaw, too weak to do any real damage but the Basilisk faltered and broke off its attack, changing trajectory away from the Slayer. He sped away from the veering monster but one of its great mandibles struck him as it swerved, throwing him into the next continental shard and bringing his ARMOR down to 27.

Furious, the Slayer landed on the next landmass and continued running as soon as he hit the ground. The Basilisks would circle around, try to catch him by surprise around the edge or perhaps even tunnel through the mountain right beneath him, swimming through the solid rock as easily as a shark through water. He needed to keep moving if he wanted to avoid-

“ROOARR-WAAHH!”

A Mancubus.

The Slayer swerved at breakneck speed before he entered the festering territory of the hulking demon, a grotesque seven-meter-tall monstrosity and the greater Hellspawn of Beelzebub which aimed its arm cannons at him and unleashed a wave of flaming bile, filling the skies with noxious gas and reducing the chasing packs of imps to dark sludge on the Hellscape. He equipped his plasma rifle and opened fire at the giant beast as he ran to put distance between him and it. ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP! The few plasmoids that hit did little damage to the demon’s thick armor. Only its small cycloptic head and grotesquely engorged, scarred stomach were left exposed. The Slayer leapt off towards the next mountain and glanced at the Mancubus as it opened a summoning circle from which two cacodemons drifted out. At once these turned towards the Slayer and began barraging his position with lightning strikes as the Mancubus launched flaming orbs, fast as missiles, which exploded in his wake and ate away at the very mountain with caustic bile. With little room to maneuver between the decaying mountain and further incoming fireballs, the Slayer willed a command unto the Hellscape and produced a stone barrier to block the Mancubus’s attacks. The barrier blocked the fireballs and began melting away beneath the vile putrefaction, but the Slayer was already on the move.

Leaping into the open air, he switched to his new D12 chaingun and aimed the barrel. He put his hand on the handle, feeling the whirr of the motor for the briefest moment before pulling the trigger.

RATATATATATATAT!!

The sound was a cacophony of thunder, each round a fiery bolt of lightning that roared across the landscape and brought down the Slayer’s vengeance onto the vile creatures of Hell.

Thirty-millimeter, tungsten-forged, uranium-coated vengeance.

In another person’s hands, such rounds could take down an aircraft or puncture an armored vehicle.

In the Slayer hands, these rounds passed through the hides of Cacodemons and the thick armor of the Mancubus, shredding their internal organs and eviscerating the Cacos into moist blue meat as the Mancubus raised its arm cannons in a futile attempt to shield itself.

“ROOARR-WAAHH!”

He got distracted.

He neglected his surroundings and failed to notice the second Mancubus taking aim at him until it was too late. Its repugnant rockets soared through the sanguine sky and exploded against the Slayer.

0 ARMOR, 143 HEALTH.

FILTHY BAG OF FESTERING SHIT!!

The Slayer switched to his rocket launcher in fury and blasted round after round at the culprit demon, jumping off the mountain and towards the Mancubus to improve his aim. BOOM!! BOOM!! BOOM!!

He was just wasting ammo. Rockets were too slow for such a distance and even their blasts missed the monster.

“ROAH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH!”

Another Basilisk charged at the Slayer and he moved out of the way of its mandibles, switching to and firing the chaingun to force the beast off its attack.

“ROOARR-WAAHH!”

He’d entered the putrid Hellscape surrounding the third and final Mancubus. He quickly equipped the autoshotgun and opened fire as the bile ate through his HEALTH, only narrowly avoided a stream of short-range but viciously caustic vomit from the demon as he sped away. A series of bright blue flashes from the corner of his eyes indicated the two new Mancubi had just summoned Cacos of their own.

A dark blot in the distance drew his attention. The snaking trickles of black rivers seeping into the Sanctum, like capillary tubes in tissue, as the Blood Storm encroached upon the region, lightning flashing across its deathly rains.

The situation was not faring well for the Slayer. He was unequipped to confront three mancubi on top of a Basilisk pack and the fractured environment was difficult to simply navigate.

Only one thing left to do.

He changed direction towards the nearest Mancubus while keeping an eye on an approaching Basilisk.

If there was a dirty trick the Slayer learned in the countless eons spent in Hell, it was that if he was outgunned, outnumbered, and outmatched…

The Mancubus aimed its arm cannons at the charging Slayer as the Basilisk opened its colossal maw.

…HE COULD ALWAYS MAKE THE DEMONS KILL EACH OTHER INSTEAD!

Taking care to avoid the bubbling pools of caustic offal in the demon’s vicinity, the Slayer raised his hand and launched a stun bomb at the monster, which struck and forced the creature into spasms of electrified agony. He jumped and clambered onto the demon’s shoulders before the stun wore off and forced his hand between the armored plates at the back of its neck, grabbing hold of the creature’s thick spinal cord. With simple but focused psionic commands, he forced the Mancubus to ignore him and raise its cannons to the charging Basilisk. The gargantuan beast obeyed and launched a wave of burning bile directly into the Basilisk’s open mouth. The serpentine monster broke off with a pained roar, its mouth and sides blazing with sickly yellow flames as the Mancubus’s filth ate through its shell.

Determined to get as much use as possible out of the Mancubus before it broke free of his psychic command, the Slayer turned it towards the rest of the demonic multitude. Another swell of flaming bile melted away imps and Cacodemons as even the mountain rotted away with putrescent decay. In his last moments of command, the Slayer forced the Mancubus to launch its missiles at its brethren. He caught the brief glimpse of the fireballs striking their two targets and the furious roar of the Mancubi before he leapt off his mount and rushed away through a bog of bile.

127 HEALTH.

Mancubi could resist the corrosive bile from their kin or themselves, but they were not invulnerable to any demonic attack and the three Mancubi were now inescapably infighting, and the injured Basilisk would coordinate with its pack to attack them as well. This diversion would give the Slayer enough time to complete his other reluctant goal: get the Basilisks to fight each other.

He turned his gaze to the nearest Basilisk, a monstrous beast snaking through the sky with its pack trying to get close to the Mancubi which rained all sorts of corrosive attacks on them. Their very bodies snaked through invisible planes of Hell’s reality, segments phasing and unphasing in sequential manner and leaving the caustic bile behind. This allowed them to control the limits of their injuries but also meant the Slayer couldn’t keep his grip if he aimed for the body.

If he wanted to grab a hold of a Basilisk, he thought as he eyed a trajectory and leapt off the Hellscape, he needed to go for the head!

He landed on his mark and dug his hands into one of the massive horns fringing the beast’s head. The bewildered beast violently shook and spun into the sky trying to shake him off, but the Slayer’s grip was like iron, and in its craze the Basilisk inadvertently struck a packmate with a mandible.

“ROAH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH!”

The offended beast reared around and slashed at his Basilisk with its great jaw, sending great chunks of shell and bloody tissue flying. The Slayer took the chance to jump off amidst the rain of organic debris before he got caught in the Basilisks’ brawl. He was headed straight for the Mancubi but noticed all three were heavily injured from their altercation, their exterior armor almost entirely eroded and their entrails festering in great steaming pools.

He grabbed one of the pieces of shell closest to him – a thick scale as large as him with viciously sharp edges – and flung it at the nearest Mancubi like a Hellish frisbee before equipping his chaingun. The scale struck the Mancubus on the shoulder and passed through shell and bone with no resistance, slicing the entire arm clean off. The monster roared in fury before the Slayer brought down a hail of incendiary armor-piercing rounds upon it. RATATATATATAT!! In a matter of moments the Mancubus exploded in a swell of shell, blood, and fire, its volatile entrails catching fire and blanketing the area in flaming fluids.

One down but the Slayer had twelve bullets left and there were still two Mancubi standing, now keenly tracking him with raised arms and fuming eyes. Best make them count!

Sticking the landing on the landmass, he switched to the HAR and stared down the tactical scope, charging a precision bolt and aiming for the armored plate on the second Mancubus’s chest. He did his best to avoid the blazing pools of bile from the first Mancubus, but his vision was limited as he lined up his shot and his HEALTH ticked down to 94. He locked his target and pulled the trigger. POW! The Mancubus unleashed a fresh wave of bile and he swerved hard to dodge it, and the shot strayed far into the nothing.

DAMN IT!

“ROOARR-WAAHH!”

The Slayer was drawing close to the Mancubus. He had six bullets left, enough for one more precision bolt. He raised the rifle again, aimed for the chest plate, and fired. POW! The shot hit and the Mancubus recoiled from the impact, its chest plate shattering to reveal a revolting beating heart covered with cysts and pustules.

His objective completed, the Slayer leapt at the Mancubus to close the distance as he brandished his chainsaw, swinging the blade across its scarred flabby stomach and setting loose a wave of blood, guts, and other unpleasant viscera upon himself. The Slayer grimaced in bitter revulsion, but the Praetor Suit turned the deluge of entrails into a deluge of munitions. Full bullets, plasma, and rockets.

The act of mutilation had cost only one of the chainsaw’s three batteries, clearly not enough to kill the Mancubus as it roared in deafening agony, but the Slayer had not intended it to in order to save the chainsaw. As the demon buckled in pain, the Slayer climbed onto it to reach into its gaping chest cavity, rip out its heart and shove it down its open mouth. The Mancubus groaned in tormented bewilderment before bursting in a blast of organs. 15 ARMOR, 113 HEALTH. The Slayer was covered in a fresh wave of steaming entrails but not before he grabbed one of the Mancubus’s arm cannons.

He promptly aimed the severed cannon towards the last remaining Mancubus and manually triggered it, blasting a swelling wave of flaming bile onto the demon. The Mancubus groaned as the bile ate through armor and flesh, melting them into thick blubbery sludge, but attacks of its own nature wouldn’t be as effective against it as they would be against other demons. The Slayer launched a fireball, and one after another, but Mancubi were tough and the Slayer’s stolen cannon was out of juice. He tossed the useless arm away as he glanced at the thundering black clouds rolling across the sky. The Blood Storm was almost on him. He was running out of time.

He turned to the Basilisk pack tearing themselves apart in the sanguine sky and grimaced as he raised a middle finger in their direction.

The nearest Basilisk roared in aggravation and broke off from the frenzy towards the Slayer. He eyed the beast as he strafed around the fireballs from the Mancubus. He only had one shot. He turned and Rampaged straight for the hulking demon.

The Basilisk opened its maw in a charging attack and the Mancubus shot a missile right at the Slayer.

Wait…wait…NOW!

The Slayer raised his Bracer at the last possible moment and cleanly caught the missile in his hand, immediately throwing it at the Basilisk. The fireball struck its side and the Basilisk roared as it switched target, turning away from the Slayer and towards the Mancubus which it thought had attacked. The Mancubus gazed upwards in briefest confusion before the Basilisk crashed into the mountain and swallowed the demon whole, with the Slayer firmly clenched to its mandible.

The Slayer clung to the back of the horn as the Basilisk burrowed through the landmass before crashing through the other surface. Half the sky was now beneath the black shadow and crimson lightning of the Blood Storm, which thundered and rained heavily against the Slayer’s body and senses, the flashes piercing through his eyes and the rain wearing down his ARMOR.

Even though a Basilisk’s shell had limited resistance against Blood Storms, they couldn’t navigate them. But the Slayer could with his automap. If he stole a bit of this Basilisk’s shell now, he could leap off it and lose it in the Storm. He forced his hands beneath one of the massive scales, positioned himself to get a stable footing, and pried it off with a rough heave.

“ROAH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH!”

With both hands gripping the scale the Slayer was thrown off as the beast threshed in fury. He firmly clenched the scale and raised it to shield himself from the deadly rain.

“ROAH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH!”

The Slayer turned to find a colossal and very indignant Basilisk charging for him, its mandibles open and crackling with malevolent hunger.

Oh shit.

“ROAH AH AH-”

“ROOOOOOAAAAAAHHHHHH!”

Another Basilisk charged through the darkness and bit clean through the first one, striking at the base of the neck and severing its head from the rest of the body. The body segments sputtered in and out of physical being before finally solidifying and detaching in death, and the arcane energy in the Basilisk’s maw faded away until it was as dark as the Storm surrounding it. The second Basilisk let out one last echoing howl before slithering away into the distance.

The Slayer let out the sigh he hadn’t even realized he was holding in.

He brought up his automap one last time to check for enemies. All clear, and he studied the Blood Storm’s density between him and the Black Pyramid. There were a few pockets of lower density he could traverse to limit his exposure.

107 HEALTH. He would need every last bit of it.

All of Hell probably knew already of the Slayer’s presence and whereabouts. He’d be lucky if he didn’t find a welcome party at the Pyramid. Or worse, if the UAC’s portal device at the tomb was sabotaged before he arrived. He had to hurry while the Storm was still in the sector.

He kept the automap display up, for his normal vision was useless in the Storm and he didn’t want to draw attention with his Clearsight. He manipulated the nearby disjointed landmasses into a more traversable landscape and, after adjusting his grip on the Basilisk scale to better shield himself from the Storm, set off towards the Pyramid.

* * *?

I stepped before the gate that led from the hidden chambers and out into the rest of the maze. I focused some of my mana into the strange eyeball embedded in my hand and phase shifted just as the door slid open.

My vision immediately became dim and blurry as the effect turned active, but I could still perceive the rough surfaces of the walls and corners. I checked my new radar display for any sign of movement. Nothing.

“Coast is clear.”

I hurried along at a brisk pace, anxious to get out of this godforsaken place but careful not to make too much noise. I imagined the many masses dropping from the walls onto the puddles could hide the sound of my footsteps, but I still felt uncertain to wager my life on it. Not that I could hear them.

My hearing. It gets muted too.

I could still hear some sounds but these too became greatly muffled while the phase shift was active, so I looked down to make sure I didn’t walk across the puddles. I was very clearly stepping on the shallow pools that stretched across the hallways, but I wasn’t making any splashes or ripples.

Huh. Must be phasing through the liquid.

I picked up the pace to exploit the few seconds I had of my newfound power before the effect wore off.

“Uh,” I grunted as I phased back to normal reality and loudly splashed on a puddle.

“You’re almost there, keep going.”

“Should I keep phasing till I get there?”

“Well, this effect does consume a bit of your Argent energy reserves each time you use it. Your energy regenerates but…I’d suggest you save it for your spells.”

“If we get there sooner, I won’t need them,” I replied while triggering the phase shift again and rushing down the hall.

“Okay, here. Turn left.”

I followed the Colonel’s direction and turned into a corridor indistinguishable from any other. I followed that hallway before skidding to a halt before one of the adjacent walls.

It was transparent.

”Colonel, why is this wall transparent?”

Even with my senses greatly dulled with the phase shift, I could tell that I was effectively seeing through the wall in front of me, very clearly able to see the shape and outline of the room behind it. There was a stack of short cylindrical barrels on one side of the room, filled with some dark oily fluid that seemed to shimmer in my phased state.

What the hell is that?

“Err…transparent? Seriously?

I’m taking some scans here…it’s a rock wall, same composition and density as all the others around you. It’s relatively thin but nothing special besides that.”

Something harrowingly bellowed in the distance. It was the monster, howling in the direction of the chamber I’d come out of.

“Get a move on, soldier,” the Colonel urged quietly. I did as instructed.

“Keep going. Make a right after the next two junctions.”

I ran along as I followed the Colonel’s escape route, taking note of more clear walls in my phased state to contrast from the other dark and opaque surfaces.

Some of the walls appear clear but not others…they appear clear when I’m phasing…Why? What does that mean? Thin walls, thin walls. Is that somehow relevant?

“John, your phase shift is about to give out.”

“I’ll just hit it again!”

I focused mana into the blur artifact once more before the effect wore off, and the surge of power from the artifact signaled that the phase shift was restarted. Just as I contemplated that I could retrigger the effect while it was still active, I turned the indicated corner and beheld a group of bright ethereal shapes scattered throughout the corridor. I opened fire with my machine guns out of reflex and to my surprise the rounds exploded against the nearest of the creatures and ripped it to shreds. The group turned in my direction and moved on the offensive.

I can even attack while in phase shift!

I pulled and activated my spear to preserve the last of my mana and charged.

I dashed through the group; shooting, slashing, and stabbing at the ghostly figures while avoiding the slime globs and fireballs they spat, although it was evident that they were shooting blindly. They couldn’t see me while my phase shift was active.

Wait a moment…these are the same creatures from earlier! This is how they appear while I’m in phase shift!

I thrust my spear into the heart of one beast and forced it up to split its head, dashed to the side to avoid an incoming slime ball while slashing at another creature and cutting its head off, before leaping into the air and bringing the spear down on another to slice it in half, all while keenly shooting down the many flying critters swarming around me.

“ROOOOAAAAHHHH!”

I immediately faltered as my blood ran cold. Glancing at my radar, I could see a large white dot moving fast in my direction. The other creatures I’d been fighting scampered off towards the shadows as they heard the monster approaching.

“GET OUT OF THERE! RUN!”

I collapsed my spear and hung it on my side as I bolted through the hall at full speed, listening to the thunderous splashes echo in the distance.

I had enough mana remaining for one more phase shift. I needed to save it in case bad turned to worse.

“Straight! Keep going straight!”

Will the invisibility work on the big critter? Oh God, I don’t know, I don’t know…

“ROOOOAAAAHHHH!”

Something entered the corridor directly behind me and roared. I turned to spot something huge and pale in the distance.

“OH SHIT.”

“ROOOOAAAAHHHH!”

I raced down the hall as fast as I could.

“FASTER! MOVE FASTER, SOLDIER!”

The thing continued to give chase. I could hear the echoing splashes its footsteps get closer as I pushed my body to its limit. It was too fast, far faster than me.

“JOHN! THAT THING’S RIGHT ON YOUR ASS!”

Something struck me again, a glob of mucus that stuck me to the ground just as I heard something leap.

“JOOOHN!”

I immediately triggered the phase shift and dropped to the ground at the last possible moment, freeing myself as I phased through my restraints.

The thing was barely visible through the visual distortions of the phase shift but I could still behold its size, as long and wide as a bus. It had a multitude of gangly limbs with no clear symmetry or reason all over its body, and many soft fleshy masses hanging everywhere throughout its skin.

It was then that I realized the implications of the pinkish slimy skin I had previously glimpsed.

Oh God…it’s inside-out…the whole thing is inside-out!

The beast landed in front of me as it completed its leaping trajectory, faintly growling as it passed through the space it thought I would be in. I switched to my missile launchers and opened fire on where I presumed its head was, hearing its muffled agonized roars and seeing splatters of bright red blood before scrambling to my feet and racing down the corridor.

“WAIT WHAT ARE YOU DOING?”

“I AM GETTING THE HELL OUT!”

“THE EXIT IS IN THE OPPOSITE DIRECTION!”

I ignored the Colonel’s orders and kept running, desperate to put as much space between me and the monster while my phase shift was still active. I heard a faint snarling behind me before the creature continued its chase. Though its chase sounded much slower, as though it couldn’t quite track my movements.

It can’t see me…it can’t fully see me while I’m phasing…

“Turn right! Turn here to get back on the right route!”

The wall, the clear wall in front of me.

I passed by the turn the Colonel told me to take.

“WHAT ARE YOU DOING!”

The eyeball was whispering to me. The wall, behind the wall.

“It’s a leap of faith!”

“IT’S A DEAD END!”

There were no other junctions in the hallway I was running down. Nothing but a solid rock wall in front of me and a monstrous beast behind me. The wall appeared clear in my phase shift, revealing a small room with dark barrels behind it. I had seconds left on my phase shift.

Jump. I had to jump.

“JOHN!”

“AAAHHH!!”

I jumped and phased through the solid rock wall in the blink of an eye just as the phase shift wore off. Something large crashed heavily against the other side of the rock wall, shaking the ground and stirring up dust from the wall.

“ROOOOAAAAHHHH!”

I panted heavily as my heart felt like beating out of my chest.

“Incredible…I thought the walls were too dense for you to phase through!

They’re thin, that’s why! The clear walls are thin enough to let you quantum tunnel through with the phase shift!”

At that moment I couldn’t give half a rat’s ass for the physical mechanics of phase shifting. I had just brushed with certain death again after God-knows-how-many-times and was struggling to retain my composure. Both my mind and body were exhausted beyond belief and I was almost at my breaking point.

“I’m never going to get out of here with that thing out there,” I frustratedly blurted out while staring at the stack of dark barrels in the corner.

“We’ll figure something out. Maybe lead it to the other side of the maze and phase through the walls while running like hell?”

“My energy doesn’t recharge quickly enough to get me through this whole place in one run!”

“Of course, of course…”

“All right!” I shouted while angrily standing up. “What the hell is in these barrels?!”

I walked over to the corner and the stack of barrels, worn and rusted containers marked with dents and splotches of some black fluid. I rubbed my fingers across one of the stains on top of a barrel, carrying away a thick tar-like substance that sheened like oil.

“What is that.”

The alien eye on my hand whispered the answer.

“Fuel. Fuel for the original inhabitants’ machines.”

“Fuel? What kind of fuel?”

“…Explosive fuel.”

“ROOOOAAAAHHHH!”

The thing roared from the other side of the wall, and an idea formed in my head.

“You thinking what I’m thinking?”

“You’re crazy.”

“Haha! Maybe I am!” I hysterically replied while lifting one of the barrels to assess its weight. It was lighter than I expected.

“I’m stuck in Hell in a cyborg body, shooting magic shit at actual demons while trying not to get eaten by a huge monster wearing its guts like Christmas decorations! YOU BET YOUR ASS I’M CRAZY!”

I stooped down and lifted a second barrel onto my shoulder.

“And you know what? That’s okay! We’re gonna have some fun! BARRELS O’ FUN!

Come on, Colonel! Let’s blow this thing SKY HIGH, BABY! WOO!”

“John, you can’t be serious! You don’t even know if this’ll kill it!”

“If it bleeds…I can kill it.”

* * *?

The Slayer braced himself against the fury of the Blood Storm, straining to keep his footing under the raging tempest and the sky-splitting flashes of crimson lightning.

He had yet to reach the Black Pyramid and was focused on lessening his exposure to the thundering Storm, his HEALTH already reduced from 107 to 62 even with the Basilisk scale shield.

Though the Storm seemed to be passing over. The heavy rains on the Slayer’s shield waned as the thundering rains slowly ceased. He’d entered a low-density pocket in the Blood Storm, and he lowered his shield to survey the situation.

The sky was changing from midnight black to a deep bloodshot color, with the wall of pure darkness that was the Storm receding behind him. The ground was marked with ember scars from the rain, and even the once-smooth Basilisk scale he held was likewise cracked and heavily eroded. It might not last all the way to the Pyramid.

The Slayer raised his gaze to the dark stone structures on the distance, a landmark he’d noticed on his route to the Pyramid. They were stout rectangular temples and angular towers, their surfaces inscribed with ancient runes and crackling with crimson energy. Clearly long desolated and heavily weathered by the Sanctum’s instability, no doubt one of the many victims of the hellish Sacrifice to imprison the Slayer. He headed in that direction.

?

“Ooooooohhh!”

A low and almost imperceptible roaring echoed from the distance. A Parasite Moon loomed in the sky above him, and he took a few moments to regard it.

It was a colossal entity measuring well into the hundreds of kilometers in diameter, its segmented rocky shell open to reveal the soft flesh interior. Massive tentacles, eye stalks, and other organs extended for many kilometers as it reached for nearby landmasses from countless shattered planets, which it would drag and feed on with the many teeth and mouths that adorned its grotesque red body.

As he was, the Slayer had nowhere near the adequate equipment or strength to take on a Parasite Moon, but he knew they’d rather feast on the remains from other demonic powers than confront him as well, and he had recovered enough power to resist its remote effects. The Parasite Moon continued to passively feed on the continent-sized world shards, and the Slayer lowered his gaze as he entered the threshold of the abandoned temple.

He brought up his automap to search for any viable resources within the towers, even though he knew they were probably barren. Anything of value would have been lost or stolen long ago. There were a few natural deposits of raw Argent energy, which the Slayer absorbed to raise his HEALTH to 82.

There was something though, a curious signal originating from the exterior of a nearby edifice.

The Slayer arrived at the signal location to find the corpse of an ancient human warrior, dressed in an enchanted set of wicked black armor, lying dead against the wall of the Hellish temple. There was a sword of similar make still clenched within the warrior’s hands, and a single pale arrow lodged in the warrior’s knee. A Dragonbone arrow and a complete set of Daedric armor.

The sword was completely useless to the Slayer, but Daedric armor was tough enough to reinforce the worn Basilisk scale with for the remaining trip to the Black Pyramid. He bent down and got to work.

“So, the rumors were true. The Doom Slayer has indeed returned.”

That voice. The Slayer lifted his gaze from the Basilisk shield and turned to the figure behind him.

On the short exterior wall circling the temple sat a person, a young Caucasian man with sharp angled features, short black hair, and strange tattoos covering his body from the neck down. He wore dress clothes with a black tie and an unbuttoned black jacket, and in his hand he carried a half-smoked cigarette.

The Exorcist.

The Slayer turned away and resumed reinforcing his Basilisk shield. He had his differences with the man but he was little more than a nuisance. He separated a piece of Daedric plating from the deceased warrior and, with some basic spell-weaving, forged it onto the shield.

“Those in my profession hear a great many things, from a great many voices, but when I heard the news, I just had to come and see for myself.

The great Doom Slayer himself. In the flesh.

The Bane of the Fallen Hosts.

Vanquisher of the Heresiarchs, Deposer of the Nameless One.”

The Slayer ignored the Exorcist’s hollow praise. Despite the man’s somewhat youthful appearance, his face betrayed a great weariness, and his hushed voice had the rough edge of a heavy smoker.

The man took a long draw from his cigarette, held it for a moment, and blew it out.

“Then again, you never were one for subtlety. You arrive here and the first thing you do is demolish a scavenger fortress? Let all of Hell know precisely where you are. Heh. What were you thinking?”

The Exorcist quietly laughed, and the Slayer stopped his work to give the man a reproachful glare. Just because the Slayer wouldn’t kill him didn’t mean he wouldn’t break both his legs.

The man’s laughter quickly turned to sharp gasping coughing, and he brought his hand up to cover his mouth. It came away covered in blood. The Slayer briefly stared at it before turning to break another piece off the Daedric armor.

“Don’t mind me, I’m hardly one to talk. People like us, we’re addicted to our self-destruction.” The Exorcist pulled out a white handkerchief to clean himself. “I suppose that’s the one thing you and I have in common. We stand on the ashes we make and throw more fuel for the fires. Like moths to a flame, headed to our own annihilation.

Indifferent. Oblivious. Passive. A perfect circle.”

The Exorcist said nothing for a moment. He slowly brought the cigarette up to his mouth and drew from it before blowing the smoke out, his face full of disgust. The Slayer continued reinforcing his shield.

“Why do you think so many hunters that come here end up turning? You can kill every demon that crosses your path, tell the Elder Gods to piss off, outrun the devil himself, but the only demons you can’t…rip and tear, are your own.”

The Basilisk shield was halfway finished. On top of the corroded brown scale sat sharp black plates of Daedric plating. Shoddy work but it’d be enough to get the Slayer to the Black Pyramid.

A new sound of low rumbling suddenly echoed from the sky. The Slayer turned to the source of the noise to find a red ship arriving through a Hell-rift above the towers. Three hundred meters in length, with an hourglass shape, an array of steel tentacles, and a ridged metal surface.

A Drow ship. What were these boot-licking butchers doing in the Blood Keep?

"Relax," said the Exorcist as he noticed the Slayer's tense posture while lowering himself beside the low perimeter wall. "They're not here for you. They've been running a number of search expeditions throughout the Shores some time before you showed up. I think they're looking for a missing shipment. Maybe one of their specimens that got away."

Hmm.

The ship hovered near the mountainside, projecting a translucent cyan search-beam through the towers as its many tentacles passed over the temples.

A single scout vessel, with limited battle capacity, deep in an abandoned region of Hell. The Exorcist was right, it was likely just a search mission, mandated by whatever masters the Drow served now. Besides, the low-density pocket on his position wouldn't last forever. He had to finish the shield before the Blood Storm returned.

The ship held its position but moved its search-beam through the towers. The Exorcist remained silent while cupping a hand over his cigarette, no doubt concealing his presence to keep out of the vessel's sights. The Slayer separated another piece of Daedric plating and forged it onto the shield.

"EEEOOOHHH?"

The search-beam landed and froze on the Slayer, instantly changing from cyan to red as its tentacles froze in place. He stopped his work and keenly looked over his shoulder at the vessel.

"EEE EEE EEE EEE!!"

The ship turned off its search-beam and immediately began rising into the Hellish sky as its tentacles fearfully writhed, emanating a shrill alarm while its dimensional engines prepared to open another rift.

Just as he thought.

Something fell from the bottom of the vessel, a strobing point of golden light that slowly floated down to the ground beside the temple. Curious, the Slayer put the Basilisk shield down and walked over to where the object landed.

It was a cube, roughly a meter in length, made of a brass-like metal and with the relief of a human skull on each of its sides. Peering over the cube’s unfolding top, he reached in and pulled out the largest of the three objects inside.

In his hand, the Slayer held a large golden revolver, stranger than any other he’d ever seen. It seemed made from solid gold, with smooth edges, purple hieroglyphs along the grip, and six glowing green chambers circling the cylinder. He turned to the rising Drow ship, almost entirely obscured in a rippling Hell-rift. He stared at it a while longer before it disappeared with a sharp clap of thunder, and ingressed the strange revolver into his weapon matrix.

BLAZING SPIRIT ACQUIRED

MUNITION TYPE – SOULS

PRIMARY FIRE – SHOOTS HITSCAN CONCUSSIVE BLAST

SECONDARY FIRE – SHOOTS REMAINING ROUNDS IN CYLINDER FOR LARGER BLAST

NOTE: BLASTS ARE SOUL-BASED; PASS THROUGH ARMOR BUT POSE RISK OF SELF-DAMAGE AT CLOSE RANGE

A soul weapon. Powerful, though it operated solely with mortal souls, which tended to be capricious. That and such weapons were largely useless against anything other than true demons, but that was hardly a concern.

Lowering the revolver and moving it into the Praetor Suit’s storage, the Slayer turned to the next of the two objects in the cube, a runestone made from black gnarled claws.

RUNE ACQUIRED – DARK CLAW

BERSERK CURSES BLOOD, CASTING TORTURED ESSENCE FROM DEMONIC FLESH

Dark Claw. A deplorable spell that did horrible things to the bodies of demons. Speaking of which, if he fought mindfully he could go Berserk for the inevitable confrontation at the Black Pyramid. Focusing on his applied runes, the Slayer disengaged Lethal Force and equipped Dark Claw, feeling their respective symbols fade and flash in his mind.

There was one more object inside the Drow cube. The Slayer reached in and pulled out a dull metallic sphere the size of his hand. It was forged from fellsteel in the shape of an eye, and behind the razorlike iris shone a malicious red glare.

NEW BOOST SYNTHESIZED – IRON SIGHT

VASTLY AMPLIFIES TACTICAL ACUMEN

ALL SHOTS AND PROJECTILES WILL FIND THEIR MARK

FABRICATION COST – 4 CALIBRATION CYCLES

The Slayer moved the final offering into the Suit’s storage and made his way back to the abandoned tower. He knelt down beside the Basilisk shield and continued reinforcing it.

“You’ve been gone a long time, Slayer. Too long. Much has changed in your absence.

Gods are born and die, races created and sacrificed. Entire planes of existence and laws of reality, rewritten like…words on paper.

The Fallen Hosts now venture beyond the edge of the Abyss. The Heresiarchs direct their servants across the Mortal and Immortal Realms, waging war against Creation and among themselves. The Murus Dei holds but it won’t last forever.

And of course, our old friend.

No rest for the wicked, I suppose.”

No rest for the wicked.

The Slayer thought back to the mysterious Cyber Paladin he’d encountered at the top of the Argent Tower. There was no chance that demon was from the UAC, something from this side had sent it to make sure Olivia Pierce breached the Martian Fracture. But who? What god or demon lord commanded the invasion of a worthless dustball in some remote region of the Mortal Realm?

It didn’t matter. There was nothing the Slayer could do at the moment about the powers that swayed the course of reality, or sought to prey on minuscule planets as inconsequential as specks of dust on the winds of the Aether. All he could do now was finish his shield, get to the Black Pyramid, and get the hell back to Mars.

Thunder echoed across the horizon. The Blood Storm was coming back.

No, it was too soon. He wasn’t done yet!

The Slayer sped up his forging as the Exorcist slyly grinned.

“I suppose this is where you and I part ways.

This is the part where I’d usually give you a profound piece of advice, a line or two to make you reflect on this…twisted game we call life, make you look both ways before you cross the road, or who knows. Maybe just to make myself sound wiser.

Although there’s probably not much I could tell you that you didn’t already know. Not that you would listen.”

The Slayer hurriedly broke off a final piece of Daedric armor and applied it onto the last exposed part of the Basilisk shield. The Exorcist stood up while pulling his sleeves back.

“So when you get back to Mars or wherever you’re going, don’t forget to write a postcard, you hear?

And if you’re ever by LA, do stop by. It’s always beautiful down in the City of Angels.

Hell, I’ll even buy you a drink.”

Crimson lightning flashed out of the corner of the Slayer’s eyes as the world was again enveloped in shadow. He had moments before the Storm hit.

“Hey buddy…”

What now?

The Slayer turned to face the Exorcist, his tie and jacket billowing against the backdrop of the looming Storm.

“…Got a light?” The man held out his cigarette, whole and unburned, and flicked it at the Slayer.

An indignant Slayer completed his shield and raised his combat shotgun square at the Exorcist’s face, but the man had already produced from his empty hand a glass ampoule filled with water, which he smashed on the ground at his feet before vanishing in a burst of light. The Slayer had just enough time to watch the buckshot pass through empty space, and he raised his shield as the raging might of the Blood Storm descended upon him.

He hated that prick.

* * *?

A thick and tense silence fell over the shuttle cabin as Ruby’s revelation came to light. Reeves raised her hand to her mouth in horror, Romero heavily backed down, but Rogers stood frozen in perplexed fury.

“…You knew.” He finally growled through gritted teeth.

Ruby sighed. She was hoping she wouldn’t have had to tell them, even though the need would probably arise.

But not like this.

“You knew.” A vein in Rogers’ temple began to throb as his face turned red.

Ah crap.

“YOU KNEW!” He yelled as he lunged at Ruby, throwing her back onto the dashboard and punching at her helmet, prompting Romero to attempt to pull him off. Ruby’s guard suit and helmet absorbed the bulk of the soldier’s blows, although she was momentarily stunned by the sudden attack.

“YOU TOLD US THAT OUR FORCES WERE COMPROMISED! THAT COMMAND HAD ORGANIZED EVAC AT THE SPACEPORT! BUT YOU LIED! YOU KNEW ALL ALONG! YOU LIED TO ALL OF US JUST TO SAVE YOUR OWN SKIN!”

“CALM DOWN, ROGERS!” Romero roared at the raging lieutenant.

“AND YOU! YOU’VE TAKEN TAYLOR’S SIDE FROM THE VERY BEGINNING! DID YOU KNOW ABOUT THIS TOO? WERE THE TWO OF YOU CONSPIRING TO GET THE REST OF US KILLED?”

Rogers turned away from Ruby to punch at the gunslinger’s exposed face, knocking him back. Something finally clicked within Ruby and she sprung into action. Taking advantage of her combat training and her Elite suit’s enhanced servos, she pushed the lieutenant off and lifted herself from the dashboard. Rogers threw another blow but she quickly blocked it, kicked the back of his knee to bring him down, and struck his cheek with a single right hook, forceful enough to stop him but not so much to cause damage. Rogers immediately seized his aggression and blinked in disorientation.

“Stand down, soldier,” she hissed with deadly intent as her hand began to throb.

Rogers turned to face her with murder in his eyes while panting heavily. He brought his gloved hand up to his struck cheek, glancing at the faint bloodstain on the white plating.

Grinning, he nodded in defeat and started to laugh.

“We’re all going to die…we’re all going to die. We followed you because you’re an Elite Guard! Because we thought you had a plan! That you knew what you were doing and were going to get us out! But you never were! You never did!”

Ruby took her foot off the lieutenant’s knee, but he remained snickering on the ground.

“Why don’t you just pull your gun out and shoot me right here? Hell, shoot all of us right now, get it over with! I’m sure it’s a far better end than whatever’s out there waiting for us.”

Ruby turned away in disgust and reached her hand out for Romero, still on the floor with a bleeding nose. The gunslinger took it and she helped him to his feet.

“You okay?” She asked him.

The gunslinger did not reply as he wiped his nose. He only pursed his lips and nodded, the disappointment all too clear in his eyes. His look injured Ruby far more than any of Rogers’ blows.

“Agent, there’s something out there.”

Reeves pointed towards the shuttle’s windshield, at the sinister red glow visible in the hangar floor. Something was casting a gleam from above the clear ceiling. Ruby rushed over to the dashboard and look up through the wide pilot viewglass, immediately wishing she hadn’t.

There were deep crimson stormclouds spreading across the Martian night sky, crackling with arcane energy and turmoiling with hellish ferocity. Ruby could spot dark figures and demonic sigils flashing through the gloom.

What the hell, what the hell is that?

Reeves and Romero followed her into the cabin and likewise bore witness to the infernal horror spreading across the planet’s atmosphere. A sudden burst of static brought her attention down to the dashboard.

The shuttle’s screens were flashing with strange symbols and imagery, causing the other two to uncertainly back away. There were pentagrams, runes, feeds from throughout the Mars Base, all glitching with static as an unknown force hacked the system. Ruby tapped the screens, the buttons, anything to prompt some sort of response. Nothing.

A face suddenly appeared on the main panel, the heinous horned face of a Summoner-class demon lord. Ruby’s eyes widened. The demon stood perfectly still within the glitching scarlet image, seemingly staring through the screen directly at Ruby.

No, not seemingly. It IS looking right at me. The damned thing can see me.

A chill ran down Ruby’s spine as she felt the cold merciless gaze of the demon lord on her, feeling its evil presence as real and close as if it were right in front of her.

The other two primary screens on either side of the dashboard settled on two similar images. The second screen, colored a dull grey, revealed a different demon lord whose head unnaturally jerked around as a low growling voice emanated from the speakers, and the third purple-tinged screen depicted an empty room, no doubt containing a third hidden demon lord.

Ruby stared petrified at the dreadful scene before the images of all three demons suddenly leapt at the screens with a harsh roar, causing her to leap and shield her face in terror, and the shuttle went dark. Ruby slowly brought her arms down to look at the dashboard.

The middle screen which had held the image of the red demon lord was cracked, as if something had attempted to break through it.

Ruby resolutely grabbed her pulse rifle and headed out the shuttle.

“We have to keep moving. We’re sitting ducks out here in the open. Our only chance of survival now is to head to the labs’ lower decks-”

Ruby stopped when she realized Reeves and Romero weren’t following her. She spun to look back at the shuttle, from where the two were watching her leave.

“Are you two staying here?”

Neither one of them replied, and Ruby didn’t have the time or willpower to argue. If the others wanted to stay and die, she wasn’t going to try to convince them otherwise. She’d just as well continue on her own.

“Have it your way,” she finished indifferently before turning to leave.

“Taylor! Wait!” Romero called out to her.

Ruby stopped as the gunslinger walked up to her, bearing a stern expression.

“I’m coming with.”

“As am I!” Reeves called out as she ran up to them. “You’re not leaving me here, damn it. You promised you’d get me home.”

Ruby sighed in relief. “I did. And I will.”

“What’s the plan? Without our helmets, we sure as hell can’t go back outside.”

“As a Level 3 installation, Helix has a restricted array of teleporters in the lower decks that high-priority individuals, such as Elite Guards, can use for quick and covert transportation to secured facilities across the Mars Base. We get to them, configure them to beam us to Lazarus, and take out the foreign signal that’s interfering with the flight network. Once that’s done we come back here, fly the shuttle to the Spaceport, and hopefully find a ship that can get us the hell off this planet.”

“Can’t we teleport directly to the Spaceport?”

“Negative. The teleporter arrays that link these key facilities are a closed network, which does not include the Spaceport. Resists interference but makes them incompatible with common teleporters that link the rest of the Base, which we’ve seen are already compromised.”

“Is this our only option?” Romero gravely inquired.

Ruby hesitated before answering.

Our only other hope would be that the Doom Marine returned, wiped out all the demons on the planet including the three Summoners, and carried us off into the sunset atop a white unicorn. But he’s gone now, and even if he magically came back, I don’t think even he could take down all three.

But the team didn’t need to know about him, at least not anymore.

“Truthfully, yes. It’s the only chance we have.”

The gunslinger held his hand toward the exit.

“After you, Agent.”

Ruby prepared to leave but remembered Rogers was still in the shuttle.

“Wait, hold on a moment.”

Climbing into the shuttle, Ruby walked over to Rogers, who was hunching over in the pilot’s seat.

“Lieutena…Rogers, listen to me. There’s a chance we can make it out of here. We’re heading down to the lower decks, take a teleporter to the Lazarus Labs so we can shut down the foreign signal and fly this shuttle.

I shouldn’t have lied to you, and if you want my blood after this is over, you can have it. But we need you if we’re going to make it, and you’re not gonna last long on your own either.”

Rogers remained silent a moment before responding.

“‘No one gets left behind.’ Heh. Spoken like a true soldier.”

Ruby thought back to Colonel Johnson and that night on Europa, how he chose to come back and save his platoon.

No, Johnson was a true soldier. I’m just doing what he would have done.

Johnson would never have led civilians to their deaths.

What the-! No! No! Where did that come from? Crap, they’ve really gotten to me. Come on, Taylor! Get a hold of yourself!

Forcing herself to clear her mind, she thought Rogers would choose to stay and die before he dejectedly got to his feet.

“I’m coming, but I’m not doing it for you or for that mercenary. I’m doing it for Reeves. I’m doing it for that girl who died back at the hospital. And I’m doing it for the doc.”

Ruby’s heart panged as she remembered the young technician, mauled to death by imps. She’d completely forgotten about her.

“That poor woman. I never even learned her name.”

“Neither did we. She didn’t talk much.”

“Then live. Make it back to Earth and let her be remembered. Let Christopher be remembered.”

“Then we settle this. Between you and me.”

“Fair enough.”

“One more thing.”

The lieutenant’s expression turned troubled, and Ruby leaned in with concern.

“…We’ve been lucky so far, but if I start to turn…promise you’ll shoot. I don’t want to become one of those fucking things.”

Ruby nodded in understanding.

“I promise.”

Rogers stood at attention and held his HAR at the ready.

“First Lieutenant Mark Rogers, reporting for duty.”

Ruby returned the salute.

“On the double, soldier.”

The lieutenant hurried out the shuttle to rejoin the team, and Ruby was about to follow when a sudden ache flared up in her hand.

“Ahh, what the f…”

She pulled her suit’s glove off and felt her stomach drop.

A grisly corruption had manifested in the last two fingers of her left hand. Her ring finger was a mottled purple color, but her pinkie was completely black with dry cracked skin. She tried moving them. The ring finger felt tender but the other was cold and numb, and its fingernail was bleeding. She softly touched it.

The fingernail came dislodged from its bed and hung lopsided on the bleeding skin before falling to the shuttle floor with a soft clatter. Ruby gagged as her heartbeat raced.

“Taylor, what’s the holdup?” Rogers called from outside. “We’re all waiting for you!”

“C-coming!”

Ruby desperately put her glove back on as she hastened out the shuttle.

It’s just an infection, don’t worry. There’s medicine, there’s medicine for this. And I can always get a new hand printed.

But deep down she knew that Hell had already snared its long malignant claws around her.

If I turn before you, Rogers, promise me you’ll shoot.

* * *?

“Whew! Okay, that’s the last one!”

I dropped the last pair of barrels onto the stack I’d made in one of the maze’s rooms. The entrance was wide enough to grant the monster access, and the chamber was large enough to let me run past the stack towards the thin wall on the other side.

“This is a crazy plan, John. Only a madman would seriously consider this.”

“Good. Because only a madman could make it work.”

“John, listen to yourself! You’re going to use yourself as bait to lure the beast into this room, shoot the barrels and blow it up as you phase through the wall? This is some Wile E Coyote bullshit!

You’re a soldier, for crying out loud! Act like a soldier! Think this through carefully and tactically!”

“If things made sense here, Colonel, it wouldn’t be called Hell. Gotta fight hellfire with hellfire. Ha! That’s a Catch-22, isn’t it?”

Something blipped on my radar. There were two faint dots at the edge of the display. The first moved down the maze towards me, but the second wobbled back and forth.

That’s my cue.

Guns loaded, mana charged, spear ready, full health and shields.

“I’ve got a bad feeling about this.”

“I don’t. I think this is gonna be fun.”

“Wait, the second bogey’s gone.”

The Colonel was right. The second dot which had moved in my direction stopped and disappeared, but the first kept swaying in place.

“Probably one of those smaller critters spooked by the big thing, fled to its nest or whatever.

Come on. Let’s catch ourselves a big one.”

I set off in the direction of the monster, occasionally glancing at my radar to check for other movement. So far so good.

Thanks to my previous memorization of the labyrinth’s layout, I had deduced a route that would lead the monster to the booby-trapped room while giving me enough time to get to safety.

Hopefully.

I stopped at an intersection about halfway to the monster, as far as I was willing to go.

“Now what?”

“We make some noise,” I replied before loudly shooting a barrage of missiles at the rocky walls, hearing the blasts echo through the halls.

“YOU HEAR THAT, YOU BIG BASTARD? THAT’S THE DINNER BELL! DINNER IS SERVED! COME AND GET IT!”

I switched to machine guns and let loose a storm of explosive rounds, wildly spinning in all directions.

“WHAT’S THE MATTER, DID I HURT YOU? DO MY GUNS SCARE YOU? DON’T BE AFRAID! COME HERE! HAVE ANOTHER SERVING OF STEAMING HOT LEAD! THERE’S MORE WHERE THAT CAME FROM!”

“Stop. Please just, stop.”

The white dot kept wobbling in place. I equipped my flak cannons and unloaded buckshot on the scarred walls.

“Come on. Come on! Do it! Do it! COME ON! KILL ME! I’M HERE! COME ON! DO IT NOW!”

Nothing. The dot paced in its spot but otherwise did not move. I stopped shooting.

“Something’s wrong. It’s not moving.”

“Will you listen to me now? In this situation a self-respecting soldier would-”

“No, something’s not right. It’s been stalking me this whole time, following just out of my sight to get an idea of how strong I am, and attacking me that one time I gave away my position. But it’s never done this.”

“You think it actually is hurt?”

“…Maybe.”

If it actually was inside-out, then it stood to reason that its exposed innards would make it more vulnerable. It didn’t seem I’d done that much damage for something its size, but there had been blood. Perhaps it wasn’t as tough as it looked.

“Let’s find out.”

I headed in the direction of the white dot, putting away my spear and priming my Flame Wave spell in preparation to deal maximum damage. I walked down the identical corridors and hallways before arriving at the corner behind which lay the pacing dot. I could hear a faint squelching noise around the bend.

I deeply breathed in.

“Okay. Okay. This is it.”

Three, two, one…action.

I leapt around the corner ready to raise hell but froze when I saw the source of the signal.

A mass of corpses from the other creatures that haunted the maze hung from the ceiling by a bright red entrail, held together with thick mucus and swaying to produce the movement my device tracked.

Oh, crap.

“You need to leave…NOW.”

“ROOOOAAAAHHHH!!”

A new brighter dot appeared from the direction I had just come from, blocking off the escape route I had so carefully prepared. The second bogey.

“SHIT!”

I bolted past the decoy as fast as I possibly could, hearing the distant splashing draw closer and closer.

“Colonel! Find me another route back to the trap!”

“Turn left! Turn left here!”

I did as the Colonel ordered and heard the sound of something big smashing through the macabre decoy and all the bodies splashing on the puddles.

“You don’t have enough Argent energy to phase through all the shortcuts in your path!”

“Then I might as well buy some time!”

I turned around and let loose a flame wave behind me, which spread throughout the hall and set even the moist ground on fire.

“BURN, MOTHERFUCKER! BURN!”

A hulking shape turned the corner and roared as the hellish flames engulfed it. A single flame wave likely wouldn’t kill the beast but I wasn’t going to stay and find out.

“There’s a thin wall at your one-o-clock! Go through it!”

I triggered my phase shift and passed through the wall into the adjacent corridor. I glanced at my motion tracker to find the monster running down a nearby hallway.

“Soldier, what are you stopping?”

“That thing’s still running! Why is it running?!”

“Doesn’t matter! You need to fall back! Phase through the next wall in front of you while your shift is still active!”

I raced down the corridor towards the clear wall in front of me. Leaping, I phased through it and landed right in the charging path of the creature.

“WHAT THE-”

The beast pounced and passed through me but I still winced in pain as its jaws clamped shut on the spot my disassociated body was. My overshield instantly broke as the blue bar in my display went dark.

My physical disassociation during shifting wasn’t absolute, and I realized I could still take harm from demonic attacks. The distorted shape of the monster doubled back around and I bolted away from it as my shift wore off.

“You’re going the wrong way!”

“I’m going the right way: AWAY from that thing!”

I fled through the corridors and made a sharp turn to shake the monster off, only to find myself at a dead end.

“The walls are too thick! You can’t phase through them here!”

Something huge and pale turned the corner.

“ROOOOAAAAHHHH!!”

I triggered my phase shift once again and passed through the charging beast while firing incendiary blasts from my flak cannons, but the creature slashed at me as I approached with a long gangly arm. The limb passed through my ghostly form but I still recoiled as I felt my innards violently displaced by the attack. The red bar on my display went down by half.

“AAAHHH!”

“John!”

“I’m alive! I’m still alive!” I yelled to assure myself as much as the Colonel, but I didn’t know for how much longer. One more of those blows and I was surely a goner, even if shifted. I fled away from the monster and phased through the clear wall directly in front of me.

“Yes! Yes! Go that way! Phase through the wall here! You’re on the quickest route back to the trap!”

The beast ran through the halls adjacent to me as it no doubt predicted my movement.

Fine. Let it follow me. I’ve got a dead end of my own waiting for it.

My overshield began to regenerate but I only had enough mana for one more phase shift, the one I would need to avoid getting killed by my own trap.

“The wall on your ten! Phase through it!”

I passed through the wall and returned to the familiar corridor that led straight to the barrel room as my shift wore off. I checked my radar. The beast was close but if I hurried I could beat it to the trap.

“Come on, you piece of shit cyborg legs! Run faster!”

“ROOOOAAAAHHHH!!”

The sound of not-so-distant splashing appeared behind me and I heard galloping footsteps grow louder and louder. I fired my jump pack, desperately dashing forward for every possible boost I could add to my speed.

“ROOOOAAAAHHHH!!”

The roars were only a few meters back, right on my heels. It was going to be close.

I turned back towards the monster for the first time, only barely catching a glimpse of flailing limbs, slimy pale skin, and hanging crimson viscera.

“You’re stupid! And guess what! Now you’re gonna be stupid and dead!”

I passed through the entrance to the room, ran past the stack of explosive barrels, and with a running leap, triggered my last phase shift as I spun around and heard the creature pounce.

Even with the visual distortions it was horrendous to look at. The head was long and snake-like with a drooling toothless mouth, a series of small beady black eyes along the upper edge, and a long gelatinous brain exposed along the forehead. If the creature was in agony by living such an existence, then perhaps I was doing it a favor by putting it out of its misery.

I sincerely hoped not.

I raised both middle fingers at my foe as I launched a single missile at the stack of barrels and phased through the wall.

A deafening explosion ensued which shook the very ground I’d landed on, audible even with my hearing muffled by the phase shift.

“Did we get it?” Asked the Colonel after what seemed forever.

I checked my radar. No movement. Turning back to the booby-trapped room, I noticed that the barrels of shimmering fluid were gone and the room filled with faint smoke, but the ghostly shape of the creature was nowhere to be seen. After waiting a few moments I was certain that the monster was gone as well, and I phased through the wall right before the shift expired.

The walls and ceiling of the chamber were splattered with a dark steaming fluid that ran down in thick rivulets, occasionally pockmarked with small globs of tissue, and the whole floor was littered with large chunks of charred black flesh.

“Who’s the man? I’m the man.”

“Guess that harebrained scheme of yours wasn’t so crazy after all.”

“Oh, it was crazy alright. It was fun, too. Loads of fun.”

I kicked a twisted piece of metal shell away.

“Barrels of it.”

“You think that was enough fun for one day?”

I headed out the room and towards the center of the maze.

“Sure was. Let’s get the hell out of here.”

I strolled leisurely down the once-haunted halls of the labyrinth. The same gross masses continued falling through the walls and splashing on the floor, but I felt as if a heavy weight had been lifted from that cursed place. And from myself as well.

Maybe the poor souls of the original inhabitants can finally rest.

I arrived at a sealed gate with a round depression in the center, from which several dark channels spread out across the surface in straight patterns. I got the impression that the eyeball was the key. I held it up to the gate and the channels shone with red and blue energy, lighting up the surface as the door slid up with a heavy thud.

The door opened into a large chamber that was empty except for a strange apparatus operating in the very center, a tall gyroscopic construct consisting of three rings that spun independently around a shimmering fluid core. The rings had lights around the edges which reflected off the silvery liquid, casting an aquatic glow throughout the whole chamber.

“The gateway. This was part of this place’s original architecture. The inhabitants must have created it as a method to achieve faster-than-light travel.”

“But what happened?”

“It worked, only too well. The gateway tore a hole through our universe directly into Hell, causing the consumption of their entire world. Do you remember the Event Horizon?”

“…Yeah, that classified UAC project, way back before Phobos. The company wanted to build the first FTL-capable ship, engineered from those old Martian relics. Vanished from all scopes and q-coms on its maiden voyage, never to be seen again.”

Wow, I remembered all that on my own? My memory must be getting better. I still feel strange; dazed and confused, as if something’s keeping parts of my brain switched off. But I’ll fight it. I’ll remember who I was.

“Rumor has it the Event Horizon actually broke through to Hell. Some folks say that’s why the UAC doesn’t use FTL propulsion despite being the only company with the technology. Which they only use for short-range teleporters and the Martian Hellgates.”

“So every civilization that develops FTL travel, they’re doomed to be invaded by Hell?”

“Hayden thinks so. Even claims that’s the reason behind the extinction of the ancient Martians.

The Hayden Solution to the Fermi Paradox, the bastard calls it.”

“So why haven’t we been invaded ye…”

My voice trailed off as I realized the reason.

“They’ll start from Mars. The invasion will come from Mars. They’ll use it as a stepping-stone to get to Earth!”

“John, what are you talking about? Demons can’t travel through outer space!”

“Our ships! They’ll hijack our docked ships and use them to invade Earth! You gotta warn them!”

“John, relax! There’s countless layers of security in place to prevent or deal with a major demonic breach! One of the first protocols is to lock down the Spaceport and Starport! If bad comes to worse, Central Command can remotely evacuate or self-destruct all UAC vessels and even bring the ARES array online to quarantine the planet!”

I wasn’t having it.

“I gotta get back to Earth. I gotta find my family!

Colonel! Can this gateway get me back home?”

“Uh, wait. Let me scan it.

It’s taken a real beating, soldier. Doesn’t look strong enough to bring you back, but it should be able to transport you to a viable Hellgate. At least, if your new pal upholds their end of the deal.”

I brought the blur artifact up to my face.

“I need your help. My family, my world is in danger. I know I am very different from you, but you too had loved ones, and you know what it’s like to lose all you hold dear. I can’t let that happen. I’ve already lost myself. I can’t lose them too.

Please…Help me go home.”

The red-and-blue eyeball simply stared at me. I could feel no impressions coming from it, and if it had thoughts, I had no idea what they were.

It suddenly looked down, and a sleek terminal emerged from the floor, its surface etched with thin mobile pieces like those over the door to the artifact chamber. I held the eyeball close to the terminal, the pieces lighting up and moving as the artifact manipulated them. The fluid core inside the spinning apparatus suddenly started to whirr, its surface crackling with electricity as the rings spun faster and brighter. I shielded my eyes as the gateway released a thundering blast of energy, then silence. I brought my hands down.

The rings had stopped spinning, floating still within each other in a single luminous circle. The shimmering fluid had become a perfectly still and softly buzzing transparent sphere, through which I could see some strange shadowed Hellscape.

“Will this get me closer to home?”

The eyeball nodded but then relayed a series of impressions that sank my mood.

“John, what’s the matter?”

“They’re not coming. The alien spirits within the artifact, this is as far as they go.”

“Well, why?”

“They only persisted out of hate. Towards Hell, towards themselves for the ambition that got their people killed, towards the monster that hunted them down. But they say that with that thing gone, they can finally have their release. They’ve been waiting too long, and they want their peace.

They thank me. They’ll transfer whatever strength they have left into the artifact, make it a usable relic so I can keep its powers, but from here on I’m on my own.

They wish me luck on my journey, and hope I find what I’m looking for.”

“…Damn.”

I couldn’t think of anything to say. These beings had lent me their strength and all I could do was grant them death.

“If not for you, I never would have survived this place. I honestly don’t know if I’ll make it the rest of the way.”

What do you say to someone about to die? To aliens about to die?

“You granted me this power, fixed me up, gave me a fighting chance. I thank you as well.”

Where will they go? If this is Hell, and they already exist as spirits here, what happens to them? Do they go somewhere else? Reincarnate? Or just simply…vanish?

“Perhaps one day we’ll meet again.”

Fear, sorrow, loneliness, anger, hope. Maybe we’re not so different after all.

“Goodbye.”



Farewell, friend.



The glow emanating from the artifact faded away as the eyeball changed in structure. After a few seconds, it became an inert red-and-blue sphere that cast only the faintest of light, and the presence upon my mind disappeared.

They were gone.

“John. That machine won’t stay stable for long. If you’re going to take the gateway, you better do it now.”

I stood in silence for a moment before responding.

“…Copy that.”

I walked up to the core and stopped just in front of it, raising my hand to touch the surface. My finger passed through with no resistance and was visible from the other side. I pulled my hand back.

Abandon all hope, ye who enter here.

“No. No, I won’t.”

With a deep breath, I stepped forward and passed through the gateway.

* * *?

The Slayer marched on through the Blood Storm. He was almost at the Pyramid and focused on minimizing his exposure to the Storm, his HEALTH already down to 54.

The rains waned as he entered another low-density pocket in the tempest, and raising his eyes over the edge of the shield, he could already spot the irregular monolithic pillars on the mountainous terrain, leading up to the Pyramid where it had shaped the very Hellscape with its dark presence. The pillars were made of the same stony glass as the Pyramid, though far clearer and less opaque; a deceptive medium that Maephisto commonly used for his constructs and which the Slayer fervently loathed. But it was the only way to the Pyramid, so he lowered his shield and pressed on.

He took care not to stare too long into the aggravating images reflected on the surfaces of the crystal pillars, which refracted and distorted all sorts of strange and erratic visions. The Slayer drenched in blood, sweat, and tears as he raced down the Phobos hangar searching for his squadmates. The Dreadnought Colossus looming over the city of Taras Nabad, tearing its way across the Dragontooth Mountains, laying waste to the Argenta planet through all sort of Hellish phenomena and striking down even the greatest of Atlans. The wreckage of a thousand allied starships smoldering amidst the wrecked cathedrals of Argent D’Nur. A young boy crying as his father took away the soldier toy in his hand, not understanding his father’s harsh words or anguished expressions as he explained why playing such games was wrong.

The Slayer paid these memories no mind. They were nothing but ceaseless processions of pain and anger, dulling the Slayer’s focus and bringing his attention away from the now.

Stepping into a clearing amid the crystal pillars, the Slayer stopped as his objective finally came into view.



The Slayer rampaged through the fractal crystal Hellscape of the Naraxian Plains, tearing down the great keystone obelisks and gateway towers as he massacred masses of fleeing demons with a Scalar Wave cannon.

He found his target, a metallic Fallen Host that served as general in Maephisto’s armies and towered above the retreating masses. The Slayer fired his weapon but the blast harmlessly passed through, the demon lord immune to the weapon’s soul disassociation properties, before it retaliated with an incantation that shattered the landscape and seared at his body, only serving to further infuriate him. Racing towards the demon lord, he released the useless weapon and switched to a different arm, a jet-black double-barreled shotgun with gold carvings that visibly radiated power. Recognizing the Retribution, that holiest and most feared of the Slayer’s weapons, the demon lord retreated from the battlefield and to the floating Black Pyramid, a living weaponized fortress that Maephisto had sent to protect the region. The Slayer gave chase and fired his weapon at the Pyramid.

A world-splitting blast of thunder roared across the Hellscape as the shot effectively shattered the construct, buckshot penetrating armor and body to devastate its exterior surface and breach a path towards the demon lord. Without a second thought, the Slayer charged through the debris field and rushed into the Black Pyramid through the crater in its side, blinded by sheer unrelenting rage towards the demons he hunted.

As soon as he stepped into the Pyramid’s threshold, countless unseen machinations sprung to life. The Pyramid manipulated the planes of Hell’s reality to restrain the Slayer inside an infinitely recursive series of miniature universes contained within itself. Grunting in frustration over the sudden trap, the Slayer manifested an arcane silver knife and pierced the elemental cage fallen over him with it, breaching the many universes faster than they could form. But as the Slayer surfaced back to the plane of the Black Pyramid, he bore witness to the true nature of this demonic trap.

The Naraxian Plains and the surrounding regions were falling into a gargantuan vortex of unfathomable power. Citadels, kingdoms, worlds, universes, entire planes of Hell consumed by a growing maelstrom of raw infernal energy, with countless souls, legions, lords, and gods devoured by the tempest. What was happening?



Then he saw them. The shadows of the five Heresiarchs, still imprisoned within Tartarus, manifested upon the Shores of Hell. For the first time since the First Battle, the Slayer witnessed the five Elder Gods of Hell united in effort against a common enemy: him. They were willingly sacrificing the armies and forces of Hell to fuel a spell unlike any other that had ever been seen in the history of Creation. The Slayer could see the brands of containment, corruption, confusion, degradation and torpor fusing into one paramount incantation, combined with a mystical seal that did not originate from Hell.

The Seal of the Celestial Triumvirate.

The Slayer’s fury turned to frenzy as he struggled to liberate himself before the spell fell upon him. He produced strange and powerful weapons from the Praetor Suit, dimensional resonators and god spears and astral voltrides, anything to escape the countless universes the Pyramid tried to keep him in. He fired the Retribution again and again, the shots blasting through numerous event horizons and crippling the Pyramid from within. The construct struggled to contain the destructive power inside as its very structure began to fracture. Desperate, the Slayer began to charge the Retribution’s secondary fire.

But it was too late. The ritual was complete and the Heresiarchs’ spell descended upon the Slayer with the might of a trillion sacrificed souls, forcing him into a collapsing singularity of pure infernal chaos. His visor cracked and the Praetor Suit flashed in malfunction as its systems were impaired by the cataclysmic spell. The link connecting the Retribution to the Praetor Suit’s weapon matrix failed, causing the shotgun to fall out of his hands and be lost to the maelstrom. The ground became the sky and the sky fell upon him. If he could have screamed, he would have.

Then everything went black.

?

The Black Pyramid of the Kadingir Sanctum, the kilometer-tall prison fortress that had once entombed him for untold eons, with the colossal scars of the long-past battle still on its surface and the sixth UAC ship docked inside. Five sides, five Sigils from the five Elder Gods of Hell. The tomb that had drained his powers and crippled the Praetor Suit. The one sole artifice that ever came close to stopping the Slayer.

But it had not been enough. He had escaped once. And now he would escape again.

“Slayerrr.”

He turned to face the source of the coarse resonant voice behind him and beheld a five meter humanoid figure of dark twisted metal. The Slayer widened his eyes ever so slightly.

The figure took a step to the side and began to circle around him.

“Serve the Authority. Serve the Corrax Alliance. Serve the Ascended Hosts.”

The Slayer dropped the Basilisk shield and circled around the being as well, keenly watching it with a gaze both intense and regretful.

“My people served. We served our Administrators. Served mankind under Corrax. Served the gods that came down from above.”

The figure’s body of once-living metal now writhed in undead turmoil, the biometallic tissues that could shift to produce tools of discovery and creation now produced only weapons. Such a being would have once been magnificent to behold; now it only evoked horror. And in the Slayer’s case, pity.

“And we served you. We followed your command. Carried your banner across countless realms of darkness. Waged your Unholy Crusade.”

The figure’s eyes once would have gleamed with brilliant emotion. Curiosity, wonder, honor, and compassion for the fellow mortals it met across the cold vastness of the universe. Now, they only blazed with war, violence, and vengeance.

“And you abandoned us.

My people put their trust in you, and for that, our worlds burned and the devils massacred us, hunding us down to the edge of the universe.”

The being was a Hellified citizen of the Verimor, a race of sentient cybernetic organisms that the Argenta once met in their voyages across the cosmos, and one of the founding races of Corrax. They were also one of the many victims from the night Argent D’Nur fell, and another sword of guilt piercing the Slayer’s heart.

“You will not save your world. You will not save your people from the damnation that awaits them.”

The Slayer halted. The Verimor were a respected race of the Corrax Alliance and one of the few which the Slayer held in high regard, but this Vindicator had become demonic, and if it stood in his way, he would not hesitate to cut it down.

“You cannot change their Fate, and you cannot change yours,” the demon lowly growled before stopping too. From the shadows behind the surrounding pillars stepped forth a dozen shorter Verimor drones, little more than automated biometallic sentries forming a ring around him and the Vindicator. He cracked his knuckles and held his hands ready at his sides as his adversaries brandished weapons. Zero point disruptors, dark matter blasters, nuclear decoherers, even blades and maces. The Verimor warrior formed a flaming sword and an ion cannon.

“When you arrive to Earth, it will be only to hold the corpse of humanity as it crumbles to dust on the scorched winds, and walk the ruins of your dead world until time itself dies.

Regretting what was. Regretting what could have been.

Forever.”

In the blink of an eye, the Slayer equipped the super shotgun and raised it at the Vindicator, pulling the trigger and throwing it back with the force of the blast, but the Slayer had already turned to his other opponents.

BOOM! BOOM! BOOM! He swerved and strafed around zero point beams and the disintegrating rays of nuclear force decay while firing burning buckshot at his opponents. Several Verimor drones tried charging up close to quickly finish the Slayer’s reduced health, but he kicked them away and blocked their attacks with his Bracer. One of them swung a mace at him. Parrying the blow and faltering his foe with the reflected energy, the Slayer pulled his arm back and eviscerated the demon with a Blood Punch. 15 ARMOR, 74 HEALTH.

The Slayer couldn’t risk leading his foes to the UAC ship and portal device at the Pyramid, he needed to lead them away. He switched to the rocket launcher and leapt into the air while shooting straight down, catching most of the group in the blast and faltering them as he soared away from the Pyramid.

A series of metallic whirring sounds bought his attention back down. The Verimor had shifted their body structures into flying jet-like forms, closing fast on the Slayer while unleashing a storm of fiery projectiles. The Slayer switched to his chaingun and opened fire as he fell back to the Hellscape. RATATATATATAT!! The hail of bullets tore through the demons’ thick metal armor and utterly destroyed three of them, their bodies shattering into smoking metal debris that rained on the Blood Keep. The first Verimor shifted back to its humanoid form as it fell towards the Slayer and tackled him, catching him by surprise and crashing the two through the forest of dark crystal pillars. The Slayer quickly regained his bearing as the Vindicator swung around to slash at him with its sword, switching to his phase rifle as he dodged the sword swipes but took several ion blasts to the chest. ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP! PEW PEW PEW PEW PEW! POWW! 62 HEALTH. Dodging and swerving around the Slayer’s attacks, the demon teleported across the battlefield to close the distance to him. He kicked at the Vindicator to force it back and hit it with a heat blast before following up with a left hook. PEW PEW PEW PEW! The other Verimor landed behind him and pressured him with dark matter shots. He switched to the super shotgun and shot the Vindicator in the chest. BOOM! The demon dropped to its knees as luminous red fluid splattered from its devastated torso, but the Slayer strafed away to avoid a dangerously close ray of nuclear decohesion, preventing him from dealing the killing blow. Furious, he grabbed his plasma cutter, took careful aim and fired. POW! One of the Verimor drones winced in anticipation of the shot, which missed and strayed far behind them.

“HARRGH!” It roared in mockery, but the Slayer was already turning to another target.

Hearing a harrowing cracking behind it, the demon turned around just in time to see one of the inclined crystal pillars behind it had been sliced at the base with a plasma cutter shot, which fell onto the demon and immediately crushed it. POW! POW! POW! The Slayer launched a stun bomb and fired other cutter shots at nearby crystal pillars, crushing several Verimor beneath them or leading those who rolled out of the way into blast range of the rocket launcher. BOOM!! BOOM!! BOOM!! Before long, all the demonic Verimor were reduced to scrap metal scattered across the cursed ground of the Kadingir Sanctum.

“RAAARRRGGGHHH!” The Slayer rolled out of the way before the flaming sword fell on him; the Vindicator was still alive. It rushed at the Slayer with Hellfire in its eyes and a body that was falling apart with every attack. He dodged and rolled between the demon’s legs to avoid its slashes and escape its ion blasts.

“YOU WERE SUPPOSED TO PROTECT US! DELIVER US FROM EVERY EVIL THAT WOULD DO US HARM! YOU WERE THE ONLY THING THAT COULD STAND UP TO THE MIGHT OF THE DARK REALM, AND YOU LEFT US BEHIND!”

He did not! In his many travels, the Slayer once arrived to the Verimor ages before the founding of Argent D’Nur, warning them of the existence of Hell and teaching them how to fight demons, before instructing them to seek the others that would together form the Corrax Alliance!

He had fought with Orinox the Dauntless himself! Stood at his side as he fought to his inevitable death at the siege of Urk-Vitel!

“YOU LEFT US TO DIE!”

The Slayer raised his Bracer before the Vindicator’s unrelenting onslaught and finally faltered it with a parry, the sword shattering as it struck his shielded forearm. Stepping up on his opponent’s knee, the Slayer grabbed the twirling blade out of the air and thrust it through the demon’s head. 86 HEALTH.

He respected Orinox! Always respected the Verimor! He taught them how to save themselves from Hell!

The Vindicator’s eyes flickered and faded to black, coarsely groaning as it fell to its knees and powered down to silence on the wretched Hellscape.

They were better than this! All sentient races across the universe were! They had the freedom to forge their own Fates free from the influence of the divine!

But the being’s words had cut deeper than its blows, and laying it to rest even more so. Everyone lost when Argent D’Nur fell.

A sharp flash of hellish thunder brought the Slayer’s attention to the looming Blood Storm. The low-density pocket over the area was fading, he needed to get to the portal device fast.

The Slayer raced back to the Pyramid as the sky darkened once more and the waves of thunder rolled from beyond the mountains, the Suit’s Harmonic Resonators already thrumming with shrill warbling. He crashed and Rampaged through the forest of pillars, paying no mind to the jagged trail of destruction he left in his wake. Rivulets of corrosive blood rained on the Pyramid’s stones as lightning explosively struck the capstone.

Countless swells of scarlet flame manifested around the Pyramid with legions of imps, pinkies, cacodemons, and Blood Knights emerging from the rifts as the Blood Storm violently swerved over the Pyramid, even the faint lingering power of the malignant entity able to churn and disrupt the infernal calamity.

The Slayer did not halt or gape. He loosened his shoulders and raced even faster towards the Pyramid, the murky stone pillars crumbling to fine dust against the Praetor Suit as he ran at frightening speeds.

Zombies, Damned, and Apostates shambling from the UAC dropship docked within the Pyramid. Flying imps, dark imps and pyroimps throwing all sorts of fireballs at him. Cacodemons spitting lightning bolts and crackling orbs in his direction.

The Slayer drew the Blazing Spirit and spun the cylinder. HEALTH was good, ammo was full, Berserk almost ready to go. Deep breaths, stay focused, keep moving, and always mind his surroundings.

It was time to make the Blood Keep live up to its name.

He leapt into the air while charging a Blood Punch, his fist tracing a bright red path across the sky before landing onto the demonic horde. POWW! RAHH! RAHH! RAHH! Ghostly green light flashed across the Hellscape as the Blazing Spirit released powerful blasts of tormented souls unto the flailing masses, sending limbs and gore flying. The Slayer Rampaged across the horde to stay on the move and avoid the roiling waves and shrieking lightning of the Blood Storm.

Pinkies also tore through the mob as they attempted to ram the Slayer, but a single soul blast from his spirit revolver bypassed their bone armor and reduced them to shredded giblets splattered on the cursed ground. As the horde thickened he switched to the chaingun and opened fire.

RATATATATATAT!!

Pure unfettered devastation. The heavy tungsten rounds from the autocannon passed unhindered through the hides and bones of countless vile beasts, tearing bodies apart, vaporizing organs from the force of impact, and leaving smoldering entrails smeared on the terrain.

And eating through the Slayer’s bullet pool as well.

A pack of Blood Knights charged towards the Slayer and he turned the chaingun at them, felling one and another but his bullet count was already at half capacity and he only had two chainsaw batteries left. He switched from the chaingun to the combat shotgun while strafing away from the Blood Knights’ fireballs and the rest of the horde, charging and shooting several explosive shots at the monsters. The shots hit their mark and several imps around them were torn to shreds by the burning shrapnel, but the Blood Knights continued their attack and the Slayer fell back to keep his distance, the sudden shadow falling over him indicating he was headed straight for one of the Blood Storm’s currents.

They were trying to chase him into the Blood Storm, which they had the power to resist. He switched to the autoshotgun and unloaded buckshot on the Blood Knights, eviscerating two of them but the rest advanced and leapt in slamming attacks, one of which caught the Slayer in its range. 52 HEALTH. Cornered, the Slayer threw the Knight off with a quick punch and raced into the Storm.

50 HEALTH. 48. 46. He winced as the Blood Storm’s rains pierced through the Praetor Suit and ate away at his body, his HEALTH slowly and surely ticking down. The rest of the horde avoided the Storm or wasted away to its power, but the Blood Knights remained hot on his trail and the crimson lightning stabbing at his eyes made it difficult to see and aim. He turned to his Clearsight, the shadow and flashes instantly vanishing to make the demons clearly stand out. He switched to the rocket launcher. BOOM! BOOM! BOOM! The explosions caught most of the Knights in their blast range and faltered them, and the Slayer switched to the super shotgun to finish them off. POWW! POWW! POWW!

One of the Blood Knights threw a fireball at the Slayer. He swerved around but it struck the terrain behind him and exploded in Hellfire, washing him in the scorching blaze. 18 HEALTH.

The Slayer was at critical health and the horde was nowhere near finished. If he died now, the Black Pyramid might be destroyed or swarmed with entire assault fortresses by the time he returned and the Blood Storm passed. He might not get the chance again to return to 2149 Mars.

He rushed out of the Blood Storm to conserve his remaining HEALTH and raced at a nearby zombie hoping for a quick fix, before a bright beam of hellish energy flashed from a distance and reduced the zombie to cinders. The Slayer stared but he did not stop, bringing his fist through the body of another nearby zombie and quickly recovering 10 HEALTH. It was not enough. There were no pinkies nearby, but if he could bait a dark imp into attacking him at close range, he could stagger it with a parry and then execute it for a decent amount of HEALTH. There was one nearby. He zigged and zagged through multiple speedy and homing fireballs before arriving at close proximity to the demon, watching it raise its claws to slash at him before reading his Bracer for the parry.

Right before the strike landed, a thin hook-tipped tail whipped out of nowhere and struck the imp in the chest, harpooning it away from the desperate Slayer. He turned to the culprit demon.

A low and stout figure with a barbed tail several times its body length. Four long clawed legs and two arms ending with wickedly sharp scythes. Two black jagged horns whose surfaces flashed with glowing symbols, and a single circular blazing rune instead of eyes above its bared mouth. A Velcore.

?

Strafing around the demon while switching to the HAR, the Slayer lined up a precision shot while avoiding the pulsed beams of hellish energy the Velcore shot from its ocular rune. Velcores were cunning and they frequently struck when the Slayer was at reduced health. He aligned the shot and fired, the bolt striking the demon in the head and breaking off one of its horns. Rushing in while the demon was faltered, the Slayer grabbed a hold of its body and threw it at a nearby caco who snapped at him, the smaller demon vanishing behind a mangled mess of gore and teeth.

The rest of the horde had not ceased its assault and several other Velcores attempted to snipe him from afar, just as the dozens of imps and cacodemons lobbed fireballs and lightning bolts at him. He needed to take out the Velcores first and stat.

He was almost ready to go Berserk. Just had to charge it a bit more.

The Slayer changed his trajectory to lead him straight into the heart of the horde, Rampaging through the demons directly in front of him as he noted the positions of all the Velcores. A wave of imps and zombies swarmed at him. He put the HAR away and raised his fists for melee combat. He kicked an imp away and brought his fist through its face and he rushed past it, raised a zombie over his head and broke its back like a twig, cracked a pinky’s face armor with his knee and pulled its horns to rip its head apart. As the horde crashed in over itself he clambered to the top while avoiding claws and teeth, straining free of the clutching arms while equipping the combat shotgun and reading himself for his next course of action.

He thrust off from the bodies beneath and activated his Iron Sight boost. He pulled his arm free from the latches of a grasping imp, placed the barrel on its chest, and instantly blasted it apart.

?

The Slayer’s senses became as sharp and precise as a honed knife. He had complete situational awareness and felt the weapon he carried as natural a part of him as the hand that held it.

Slinging the shotgun around and pulling the trigger, he immediately knew the explosive shot killed the Velcore pouncing behind him. He brought it back around and sniped another velcore hundreds of meters away, switched to the HAR and instantly put a precision bolt through the ocular rune of another one behind a dozen other demons without even a moment to aim.

The Iron Sight boost amplified the Slayer’s tactical capabilities and allowed him to land pinpoint shots without even the faintest of effort. His aim was true, his bullets found their mark. An imp all by itself threw fireballs at him. He charged a shrapnel shot and fired it. The imp was now all by itself in multiple locations.

Phase rifle. ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP! The plasmoids found their way to the targeted cacodemon and vaporized it in a burst of moist blue tissue.

Rocket launcher. BOOM! BOOM! BOOM! A Velcore slinked behind a pinky in the belief the armored demon would shield it from the explosion.

The rocket that curved around the pinky and killed them both proved it wrong.

The Slayer spun around.

BOOM!

A foolish Blood Knight had attempted to charge at the Slayer behind his back, the rocket reducing it to a steaming red gibs that splashed onto the Praetor Suit.

He was doing surprisingly well. Ammo pools were good, the horde was almost gone, and his HEALTH was 74. All that was left to fight was-

“RAAAAAARRRRRRGGGGGGHHHHHH!!”



Two Barons of Hell.



“RAAAAAARRRRRRGGGGGGHHHHHH!!”

Ten meters of muscular crimson flesh, twisted ebony horns, wicked talons and jagged teeth roaring with infernal ferocity from the peak of the Black Pyramid as scarlet lightning flashed behind them. Arcane runes of power floating over their hands and chests while a bright hellish halo adorned their heads. The greater offspring of Abaddon and major demon lords of infernal battle-fortresses. Semi-wild beasts of the untamed Hellscapes, often serving as forward command and heavy attack units on infernal sieges or in invasions of mortal worlds.

The dull grey pillars surrounding the Pyramid immediately morphed into deadly sharp blood-red spikes, and the Blood Storm changed from an unguided tempest to a directed force of calamitous destruction, bending under the Barons’ powers and descending upon the Slayer.

The Slayer immediately raced away from the Pyramid as the Resonators’ steady tones crescendoed to a heavy thunderous cannonade, rushing away from the chasing Blood Storm and aiming the rocket launcher at the Barons, although he knew it wouldn’t do much good. It would take a dozen direct rockets to kill a single Baron, ammo which the Slayer no longer possessed, and the Tracker component on the upper right corner of his HUD indicated Iron Sight was almost depleted.

The two Barons began charging towards the Slayer, rushing down the sides of the Black Pyramid and crashing through countless demons in their path. The rockets the Slayer shot curved towards their targets and struck. One, two. The missiles exploded and blasted hide and flesh from the hulking demons, faltering them with their sheer force, but the Barons remained standing and turned to the Slayer with abominable fury.

“RAAAAAARRRRRRGGGGGGHHHHHH!!”

The entire demonic horde around the Pyramid screeched and rushed at him with increased ferocity, the Barons’ violence and command manifesting in their lesser minds as blood-crazed frenzy.

The Slayer turned the rocket launcher away from the Barons and towards the mob falling upon him. BOOM! BOOM! BOOM! Limbs and gore flew everywhere but the demons grew too close to use the launcher safely. He punched away the foes that came too near, but their blows were fiercer. Harsher. 47 HEALTH.

He pressed the trigger on the rocket launcher once more, which clicked emptily.

ROCKETS – 0

The bar beneath the Iron Sight icon in his HUD went dark as the honing boost to his senses disappeared. The boost was gone.

Chaingun!

RATATATATATATAT!!

The barrage of piercing incendiary rounds decimated the masses around the Slayer and cleared the Hellscape in his vicinity, unobstructing his view of the colossal green fireball laying waste across the mountain range straight for him.

BOOM!

Direct hit. 12 HEALTH.

The Slayer flew backwards as his Blood Rage flared and the smoldering Praetor Suit recovered from the massive hole blasted in its front side. He crashed across the Hellscape before gathering his bearings and recovering his balance, leaving a ravaged trail of devastation across the rocky terrain.

The Barons were still a distance away but Hellfire was already gathering in one’s fists. Widening his eyes, the Slayer rushed to avoid the incoming attack. The Baron leapt high into the air and slammed the ground.

A blazing wave of Hellfire erupted from the impact site with the force of a bomb, laying waste to the masses around the Pyramid, shattering the blood-red crystal fields, and rapidly approaching the Slayer.

Thinking quick, he manipulated the Hellscape to raise a stone barricade in front of him just as the scorching wave reached his position, passing over his cover and melting the edges of the infernal rock.

“Eeeeee…”

OH SHIT!

“PEWW!!”

The Slayer rushed from behind the slab of rock and onto the charred terrain as a blinding beam of Hellish energy vaporized his meager cover, right in front of the other charging Baron and its massive claws falling upon him.

He reflexively raised his Bracer and parried the swipe. POWW!

The Slayer was thrust back with the force of the blow, and even the Baron briefly faltered but remained alert. Acting quick before the demon attacked again, he leapt upward and quickly focused a Blood Punch, the heavy blow amplified further by Blood Rage from the Slayer’s reduced health. The punch landed squarely on the Baron’s groin.

“RAAAAAARRRRRRGGGGGGHHHHHH!!”

He hurried away from the pained demon to quickly recover distance before it attacked again.

?

His Bracer could block a direct hit from a Baron of Hell in its entirety, but it’d still be unwise to engage a Baron at such close range, especially at 12 HEALTH.

Furious, the injured Baron gathered Hellfire within its hands and launched colossal waves of flame towards the Slayer. Rampaging at full speed, he swerved and strafed around these as they thunderously struck again the nearby mountains, reducing them to charred rubble and boiling lava.

Turning in the direction of the beam that had pulverized his cover, the Slayer spotted a horrific hyperdimensional construct of amalgamated crystal shards and demon gore, incensed with bright energy and forged by the Barons’ latent power, hovering and folding unto itself above the Hellscape. A Blood Prism.

Blood Prisms were slow and fairly easy to take down, but they’d take his attention away from the Barons and pressure him from a distance. And the longer the Barons were present, the more Prisms would appear.

“RAAAAAARRRRRRGGGGGGHHHHHH!!”

The other Baron opened a dozen summoning circles and spawned a ring of Blood Knights that immediately chased after the Slayer. They’d try to chase him into the Blood Storm again but at such reduced health he’d never survive it, and he wouldn’t be able to dodge any more hits from the Prisms or Barons.

Sometimes though, the best defense…

The Slayer slung a grenade at the Baron behind him while launching a stun bomb at the other closest to the pack, before brandishing the chainsaw and charging a Blood Punch.

…WAS A GOOD OFFENSE!!

In a single twisting motion, the Slayer brought the chainsaw across the chest of the nearest Hell Knight before swinging his left hand and landing the Blood Punch on its shredded chest, the amplified blow releasing a crimson explosion that eviscerated half the pack.

Fresh ammo, 32 HEALTH. Better than nothing.

He strafed away from the remainder of the pack as the Baron in front broke out of the stun and threw a fireball directly at him. He swerved out of the way and the projectile exploded as it struck the Blood Knights, but these were unaffected. Hell Knights were completely subservient to the command of Barons and carried immunity to their attacks as kindred Hellspawn of Abaddon.

What to do now?

Another Blood Prism had formed from the shattered crystal fields and demonic cadavers, and he could spot a third in the process of coalescence. The first meanwhile was folding itself into a long, pronged sniping configuration and charged a beam in the Slayer’s direction.

“Eeeeee…”

He maneuvered himself into position and raised his Bracer.

“PEWW!!”

A brilliant beam of energy erupted from the construct and struck the palm of his Bracer, converging into a crackling focus of light shining within his clenched fist. He turned towards the more-injured Baron and released the energy towards it. POWW! The beam struck directly in the monster’s chest and seared a deep smoldering crater. It buckled and stooped to its knees while clutching its chest but was still alive.

Now was his chance!

He switched to the rocket launcher and opened fire on the injured Baron while charging towards it. BOOM!! BOOM!! BOOM!! The missiles struck and blasted great chunks of flesh of its body and exposed grisly glistening tissue and ebony bones.

The Slayer entered into range of the Baron’s melee attack and leapt.

The Baron slashed at him one last time, but he keenly parried the blow and finally staggered the monster. Landing on the demon’s shoulders, the Slayer grasped one of the twisted black horns and tore it free from the skull before swinging it like a bat and smashing the Baron’s head off, its accompanying halo likewise vanishing in a burst of ashes. 57 HEALTH.

“RAAAAAARRRRRRGGGGGGHHHHHH!!”

The remaining Baron roared with enraged savagery as its companion was slain, fiercely intensifying its attacks towards the Slayer. It threw one fireball after another while launching great surges of flame that soared and exploded against the Hellscape.

He swerved and strafed around the attacks which shot past into the Sanctum, vanishing into the emptiness or reducing the mountains to smoldering embers. One struck close to a Blood Prism and triggered an iridescent shield.

He needed to lessen the pressure on him from the Prisms, which were not only armored but deployed vigorous defense fields.

Phase rifle! ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP ZAP!

The Prism folded its structure into a broad flat configuration, increasing its surface area towards the Slayer to maximize the shield facing him. He sustained the stream of plasmoids as the shield shimmered and finally shattered.

Chaingun! RATATATATATATATAT!

The rounds passed through the construct’s hard crystal armor and organic interior, setting fire to its structure before demolishing it in a burst of shards and gore that exploded in a bright cross of crimson light.

One Prism down. Keeping an eye on the remaining Baron, the Slayer turned the chaingun towards it and opened fire. The rounds found their target but the Baron was immune to their incendiary effects and pressed on through the barrage of bullets.

Rocket launcher! BOOM! BOOM! BOOM!

The Baron raised its hand and produced an ethereal runic shield that blocked the incoming rockets, but ceased its advance and moved around the Slayer for the duration of this guard.

Two Prisms to go. The next one folded itself into heavy attack configuration, morphing its crystal shell into the shape of an inverted pentagram and baring a small red spherical core as an infernal aura formed in preparation of its attack.

“Eee…”

The Slayer switched to the HAR and lined a precision bolt just as the construct lowered its shield to fire its beam. POW!

The bolt hit and the core exploded in a burst of blood, the Blood Prism quickly folding unto itself and closing with a solid clang.

“EEEEEE!!”

With an ear-splitting screech, the Blood Prism recoiled in mortal agony and took on a dark spiny form before its structure came apart and finally crumbled to dust.

Only one Prism left!

Desperate to kill the Slayer, the Baron reached out and forced the crystal fields under its control. It freed a multitude of blood-red spikes from their bases and reformed them into long thin lances which floated in the sanguine sky before turning to the Slayer and shooting in his direction like a macabre rain.

Chaingun! RATATATATATATAT!

The heavy piercing rounds reduced the barrage of crystal lances to a drizzle of fine dust that rained onto the Sanctum and harmlessly chinked against the Praetor Suit.

With lightning-quick movements, the Slayer grabbed one of the incoming lances out of the air and returned it to the immobile Baron. The lance struck and embedded itself deep within the demon’s shoulder, which stumbled back and roared in excruciating agony.

“Eee…”

The Slayer quickly switched back to the HAR and fired a precision bolt as the last Blood Prism attacked. The shot landed and the construct’s beam missed, exploding against the terrain far in the distance, although the bolt had just grazed and cracked the Prism’s core.

But it was exposed!

Grabbing one of the last crystal lances, he switched to the Blazing Spirit and launched consecutive soul blasts at the construct to keep it hitstunned while rushing at it. The Prism morphed into a spinning forked structure and shot a volley of beams at him, which he strafed and zig zagged around.

“Eee…”

He leapt at the Blood Prism with lance pointing straight forward. The lance passed clean through the construct’s defense field and sank into its crimson core. The Slayer fired his jump pack for one last momentum boost and fractured its heart, leaping off the crippled Prism before it impaled him in its death throes.

Clang!

“EEEEE!”

67 HEALTH.

“RAAAAAARRRRRRGGGGGGHHHHHH!!”

The Baron of Hell roared in violent despair. Heavily injured and at the end of its power, alone against the Slayer with no other demons on the battlefield. With the last of its strength, the demon lord raised its arms to the sky and called upon its infernal creator, the Mark of Abaddon appearing above it as it implored for a blessing from the Elder God of War.

The Slayer quickly switched to the Blazing Spirit and fired all six barrels at the demon lord to finish it off, but it was too late.

A great surge of infernal power exploded unto the Hellscape and the Slayer watched a colossal rift in Hell’s reality form above the Baron, the sky erupting into many rings of black and red as the Blood Storm swirled around the vortex and the demon lord vanished within the hellish radiance.

A new legion of demons burst forth into the Kadingir Sanctum. Imps, Hellions, Velcores, Cacodemons, Hell Knights. Blood Prisms. Mancubi.

Basilisks, their great serpentine forms slithering through the rift and roaring upon locating the Slayer.

And at the center of it all, the Baron of Hell absorbed the crimson energy channeling from the rift, healing its body and restoring its power.

“RAAAAAARRRRRRGGGGGGHHHHHH!!”

The radiance vanished and the Baron of Hell roared amidst the Hellscape, body fully restored and Hellfire blazing in its eyes.

The Slayer wasted no time in returning to battle, equipping the chaingun and opening fire, but his ammo was running low and with the Baron’s ferocity coursing through the horde, his HEALTH surely and steadily ticked down.

54. 41.

He dodged fireballs and searing beams, caustic missiles from Mancubi and a Basilisk ramming into the Hellscape in an effort to devour him.

The Baron appeared in front of him.

He raised his Bracer in defense and the monster’s swipe glanced off it, but in its blood craze the demon resisted the power surge and immediately followed with another attack. POWW! The Slayer was being thrust back with every blow and could not escape the monster’s assault. POWW POWW! POWW!

“RAAAAAARRRRRRGGGGGGHHHHHH!!”

The Slayer raised his Bracer one last time.

The timing was wrong.

He watched the defensive field fade from the Bracer before the strike had even landed.

Had the Baron purposefully baited him?

He thought he spotted something resembling a grin appear on the demon’s jaws before the blow landed and claws tore through his body.



“Please have a seat.”

He and another half dozen inmates groggily sat down on the steel chairs in front of the officer, handcuffs and chained boots clinking loudly, but the armed guards holding rifles to their necks remained standing.

“Time is short so I’ll be brief.

At approximately 0000 Coordinated Mars Time, multiple UAC research facilities on Phobos and Deimos were attacked. Who, or what, is responsible remains unclear, but both moons are presumed lost and Mars is on full planetwide alert. Our fleets stationed at the moons, of the US military and the Union Aerospace Corporation, are gone, and no survivors are confirmed.

No communications were received from either moon during the window of the attack, apart from one emergency message. The transmission is heavily corroded but was recorded and will now play.”

<…We require immediate military support! Something fraggin’ evil is coming out of the gateways! Computer systems have gone berserk! The base is breached and we’re losing life support!...killing everyone! Our guns and defenses are ineffective and more than half our people are dead! We need support NOW GODDAMN IT!.. Oh my God, OH MY GOD. They’re bringing our ships down. THEY’RE BRINGING OUR GODDAMN CAPITAL SHIPS DOWN!! THOSE TWO BIG RED THINGS ARE SHOOTING OUR CRUISERS AND CARRIERS RIGHT OUT OF THE SKY!!...They’re breaking through the barricades! DO NOT COME FOR US! I REPEAT, DO NOT COME FOR US! ABANDON MARS! YOU MUST LEAVE AT- AAAAHHHH!!>

A grim silence fell upon the room as the voice’s deathly scream faded away into nothingness. Some of the inmates fidgeted uncomfortably, others frowned in confusion. The Marine made no response, but the man seated to his right sat up straight, while the woman to his left whistled in surprise.

“Crikey,” she muttered with no indication of concern or unease. “How about that.”

The officer continued.

“No further transmissions have been received nor further activity observed from either moon. Deimos has gone dark but we have established visual contact with Phobos, and plan to send a team in for recon, situation assessment, and if possible, extraction of any survivors.”

“Here it comes,” whispered the voice to his left.

“We plan to send you.”

The room immediately erupted with the inmates’ protest. Responses ranged from accusations of unethical treatment to declarations of an unwillingness to die.

The Marine turned to the woman beside him, who replied with a sly grin. Told you.

The armed guards prodded the inmates with their rifles and shouted at them to be quiet. The officer waited calmly until the room returned to silence.

“Question, sir,” inquired the woman while leaning forward.

“Squad leader Ashford.”

“We all know why you’re sending us instead of normal troops. But have you tried unmanned recon?”

“Unsuccessfully. Whatever jammed the comms during the attack remains in effect, and all drones we’ve sent have failed due to interference.”

“So we’ll be cut off as well,” Ashford affirmed while resting her chin on her hand. “A single unit of six max-security military inmates sent to investigate an attack of unknown origin. No comms to report back or call for extraction. Plenty of guns, expensive equipment, and possibly escape pods.

Bugger me if that’s a great idea.”

“You were brought here because you were the best at what you did. For the moment, your past crimes are irrelevant. You’re all highly trained and skilled professionals, and your psychological profiles have been deemed acceptable for this mission.

I won’t lie. The fact is, this is a highly dangerous operation with a considerable chance of failure. Two of the best defended locations in the Solar System have been lost to an attack of unknown nature. Command needs an assessment ASAP to formulate the next course of action, and you’re the only platoon with spec ops experience for fifty million miles, felons or not.”

“We may be felons,” spoke the man to the Marine’s right in a low but firm tone, “but we still have rights. Our cases were closed, our death sentences pardoned, and you can’t simply throw us away to die like dogs.

My men and I are not expendable.”

The other inmates clamored in agreement, but the officer quickly rushed to quiet their complaints.

“Private Osborne, no one is throwing you or anyone else away like dogs. You have the full choice to refuse this mission.”

The turmoil immediately died.

“…Choice?”

“Command is offering this platoon the opportunity to carry out this operation, in exchange for certain accommodations to your present circumstances.”

“What accommodations could you offer us in this shithole colony?” Osborne asked in irritation. “Monthly leaves to the toxin refineries? Lifetime supply of nutrient paste? Visitations? I have two hundred years of off-Earth imprisonment with no parole or outside contact.”

“I have three,” Ashford whispered on the verge of laughter.

“Look, gentlemen – and lady…”

Ashford winked.

“We don’t have much time, and Command is willing to negotiate after the operation is complete, but they’re ready to transfer you to less-restricted installations with more favorable commodities, limited employment and access to commercial utilities-”

“Joy,” Ashford sighed as she wiped the sleep from her eyes. “Lab-grown meat and that diluted piss which Americans call beer.”

“-and supervised use of pre-recorded communications to Earth.”

The inmates murmured to each other in surprise. Ashford blinked and raised her eyebrows.

“Phone rights, you say?”

“Supervised and pre-recorded, but yes.”

“Hmm.”

“Time is running out, people. I need an answer now.”

“…I could do with a phone call home. Got a mate I haven’t talked to in ages.

Huh. What do you say, boys?” Ashford asked the platoon while leaning back on her chair. “Up for one last ride?”

“…I’m down.”

“Sign me the hell up.”

“Sure. Why not? Maybe now they’ll let me watch restricted flicks in the rec room.”

Ashford turned to face the Marine but she already knew his answer, and they both nodded in agreement.

She leaned forward to look at a doubtful Osborne, who remained silent.

“Phillip?” She asked.

The private glowered but reluctantly sighed.

“Fine. I’ll do it.”

“We’re in.”

“Roger that,” replied the officer. “You’ll be escorted to your briefing room where you’ll be given mission details, conditions, and instructions.

Good luck, marines. And Godspeed. Dismissed.”

With urging from the armed guards, the six inmates got to their feet and loudly shambled out of the room. Just as the Marine thought back to the person he would call as soon as the mission was over – and thank for sparing his life – he felt an elbow at his side.

“Don’t worry, big guy,” Ashford gleamed. “I’ve got your back.”

The Marine was a full head taller than the squad leader and had to look down to make eye contact, but he cracked a smirk, both out of camaraderie and uneasiness. Ashford responded with a smile as bright as it was nefarious.



Don’t worry, big guy. I’ve got your back.



1 HP.

Berserk. Activated.

The Doom Slayer erupted in a blinding beam of scarlet lightning as flames embroiled his entire body and rage flooded his mind.

Pure, raw, unfettered rage.

His HEALTH instantly rocketed to 100 and he rose suspended into the sanguine sky of the Kadingir Sanctum as the tones from his Resonators climaxed into a grand booming choir and the demonic horde veered away from the overwhelming surge of power.

He recoiled and grimaced, his rage scorching at his mind and something slicing its way from within, something like twisted blades stabbing through his body.

He stared as his hands twisted and contorted into a horrific form, his fingers morphing to become long wickedly sharp claws that tore through the Praetor Suit and gleamed with a scarlet aura as his Dark Claw rune came into power.

The Slayer would have yelled in fury and agony, but the Chains that bound his lips remained sealed as they were at the First Battle, and he voiced nothing.

So, he attacked.

He Rampaged through the horde and blindly slashed at everything that moved in his crazed fury. He slashed at a Velcore and dismembered it in a single swipe. He slashed at a pinky and reduced its armor and body to long hemorrhaging rinds. At a Hellion, a Blood Knight, a Cacodemon, one demon after another, all dissected and severed in a single fell blow.

“Eee…”

The Slayer charged at the Blood Prism preparing to fire its beam.

“PEWW!!”

He swerved around the blinding beam as it struck and vaporized a dozen demons behind him. He leapt at the crystalline construct and swiped a clawed hand at it, slicing through shield and armor and shredding its core in a single slash.

“EEE-”

The Prism almost erupted in dark glossy spines before its contained energy burst through its shell and exploded in a bright scarlet cross, leaving a large smoking crater amid the frantic legions.

“ROOARR-WAAHH!”

A Mancubus fired its bile at the Slayer and washed away countless demons beneath a wave of filth, and its attack landed and began to eat away at the Slayer’s HEALTH.

This only made him madder.

He charged through demons and bile alike in his ravenous bloodthirst, his glaring eyes set only for the Mancubus. He swiped his claws in its direction even before arriving close to it, but the claws launched crimson waves that pierced through the Mancubus’s armor, severing an arm cannon in a single strike. He slashed again. The next wave sliced open its belly and spilled its foul innards onto the Hellscape, and the Mancubus roared in agony. The Slayer finally reached the Mancubus, and effectively passed through it with a single swipe, already long gone before the upper half of the demon’s body even hit the ground.

Another Mancubus launched fireballs at him. Too far to attack it with his claws, the Slayer rushed for a nearby Velcore and buried his claws in it. The impaled Velcore shrieked as its body began to deform under the malignant power of Dark Claw, liquifying into a writhing black-and-red mass.

The Slayer tossed the Velcore’s remains at the Mancubus, which soared through the air before impacting and immediately erupting into a barrage of long spiked tendrils. These impaled dozens of nearby demons and harpooned them towards the Mancubus before exploding in a blast of arcane crimson energy.

He impaled further nearby demons and tossed them as one biobomb after another, the battlefield darkening beneath the shadow of the tendril barrages and the downpour of flying body parts.

“ROAH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH!”

A Basilisk slithered in the sky and doubled back around in approach of the Slayer. He leapt off from the ground of the Kadingir Sanctum towards the colossal serpent and swung his claws at it, the attack cleaving through the Basilisk’s shell and almost slicing its head off. The demon roared as thick black blood flooded from its fatal injury and its head hung limply from its sputtering body segments. The Slayer landed on the Basilisk’s horns and brought both clawed hands down on the beast, utterly shredding its massive head and falling back to the Hellscape on the collapsing corpse. The Basilisk’s body broke apart and its segments crashed down on the demonic legions as the Slayer leapt off and sliced his way across the mob.

“ROAH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH AH!”

Another Basilisk roared as it charged at the Slayer, bringing its great jaws down onto the terrain and cleaving a trail of devastation across the horde towards him.

The Slayer had had enough.

He Rampaged towards the monster at full speed as it bared its many mandibles and its flaming maw, leaping off in a great soaring arc and passing directly into the Basilisk’s throat.

Not even a moment later, massive fiery claw marks appeared on the serpent’s shell as something sliced its way from within. They stretched the entire length of the demon’s body and twisted around in great gyrating motions, its entire structure crumbling into massive ribbons of shell and tissue before the Slayer finally erupted from the back, Suit and claws glistening with demon viscera.

Most of the horde was either eradicated or fled, but the Slayer had one more demon left to exterminate before his Berserk expired. He searched throughout the fleeing masses for the last Baron of Hell before finding it moving away from him, still tossing fireballs and flame waves in his direction, and immediately headed for it.

“RAAAAAARRRRRRGGGGGGHHHHHH!!”

The Slayer strafed around one fireball and another, laying waste to the Hellscape and remaining demons as much as he did as he charged for the Baron. The demon lord gathered Hellfire in its hands and released it in a thundering smash that quaked the ground and expanded in a flaming shockwave. The Slayer continued in his Ramage and willingly passed through the blast in his ravenous fury to annihilate the Baron, paying no mind to the large chunk of HEALTH the attack took away. He had almost arrived at the Baron but chose not to use Dark Claw’s long-range attacks. He was going to make it personal.

The Baron of Hell raised its arms in futile defense, and for the briefest moment something resembling fear appeared upon its face.

The Slayer raised a clawed hand and in a single swipe sliced away the Baron’s legs. Another swipe reduced its torso and arms to dark ribbons of shredded flesh. He raised both hands one last time, and the Baron’s decapitated head gaped in deathly terror before all the Slayer’s claws destroyed it.

His rage expended, the Slayer recoiled in agony as his skin crackled with scarlet lightning and released his fury in a violent explosion, scorching the mountainsides, vaporizing the last demonic stragglers, and searing the scales of the remaining Basilisks as they slithered away into the sanguine sky.

He stood silently amidst the smoldering Hellscape of the Kadingir Sanctum while breathing deeply, watching the Blood Storm dissipate overhead. With the power of Berserk expired, the Dark Claw rune returned to dormancy and his hands were back to normal. He listed to the solemn and haunting choir produced by his Suit’s Resonators, chanting in worship and adoration of power untold.

He was alive.

He had arrived at the Black Pyramid, fended off legions of demonic beasts, slain two Barons of Hell, and was alive. Perhaps he was not as weak as he imagined.

A notification appeared on his visor’s HUD, and he turned to read it.

SAVING THROW RESTORED – GET ONE CHANCE TO SURVIVE A DEATH BLOW

RESETS ON DEATH

Saving Throw. One of the Slayer’s more advantageous powers, and one that had saved his skin more times than once. Considering his relatively low defensive capacities, it was useful when fighting against the higher powers deep within Hell.

Speaking of which, how did he ever kill those two Barons of Hell back on Phobos?

He paused for a moment as he dredged through long-forgotten memories, buried beneath ages of violence and suffering across worlds and realms.

He didn’t have the Praetor Suit back then. He didn’t have its armor or ammo fabricators, its weapon matrix or Vanguard Bracer. And he certainly didn’t have any of his powers that he now possessed. His strength, his speed. His ability to draw strength from his fallen foes, resist the dark forces of Hell, strike fear into the heart of evil. The power of immortality. He had possessed none of it.

How the hell did one man manage to slay two major demon lords with the power to fell capital ships, overtake two highly fortified moons, command entire legions and rend mountains asunder?

He was surprised he had never actually considered this before.

He had the Retribution. The UAC had possessed plasma rifles and portable rocket launchers back then. Med pack technology had just been invented, even modular armor plating. Body armor at that time was nothing spectacular but it could resist the odd imp and zombie.

But…two Barons of Hell?

There was a gun, now that he thought about it. A prototype heavy plasma cannon, a 2700 series, perhaps. What was its name?

The FOG?

No, that wasn’t it. Its real name was an unpronounceable dozen-syllable mess concocted by the science geeks, though the jarheads often called it by a coarse but reverent title, which he couldn’t seem to recall.

He sighed in defeat.

Well, whatever it was, it had certainly been one very large gun.

The Slayer realized he’d become awfully reminiscent ever since awaking on Mars, far more thoughtful and reflective than he’d ever been before.

Scoffing, he broke out of his quiet introspection and dusted off the rubble and gore on his Praetor Suit, equipping the combat shotgun and feeling its comforting weight on his hands before turning and calmly walking towards the Black Pyramid.

Ever since Phobos, his mind had been a broken mess of rage and pain, existing only to fight, to kill, to destroy. His nights were long ordeals of terrible nightmares, and everywhere he looked he saw the encroaching claws and eyes of demon-kind.

There’d been a few times in which he’d broken through his madness, maintained sanity and focus long enough to accomplish higher goals. When he arrived before the races that would one day become the Corrax Alliance and guided them on the path for survival. When he’d arrived at Argent D’Nur, climbed the ranks from outlander to fellow soldier. Making brothers, breaking bread, and shedding blood alongside the Night Sentinels long before receiving his power.

When he met him.

The Slayer’s heart panged with a sensation he’d not felt in ages, and even if he could speak he would have been unable to describe it.

He who’d shown him how to calm his mind, exist in the present, focus his anger. Gifted him his power.

His guardian angel.

The Slayer scowled at the child-like thought as he reached the Pyramid and began climbing it, minding his footing as he hiked and jumped over the deep gouges on its battle-scarred surface.

So much for that. If there was anything the Slayer had lost in his ageless slumber within that cursed sarcophagus, it was his focus. He’d never been distracted or inattentive in battle before. Or worse, contemplative of all things. Back then he’d been keen, sharp, a ruthless killing machine as efficient as he was deadly. Whatever the Elder Gods had done to him, they’d taken that edge away.

…Or had they?

He still had his anger. He still felt that ceaseless need to break and maim the bones and flesh of demonkind. To rip and tear. He still had that drive, but it was no longer the one thing that occupied his mind.

The Night Sentinels on Argent D’Nur. His squad mates on Phobos. When was the last time he thought about them? Remembered their faces, their names, their voices? How he lived and fought alongside them? Found their mangled bodies broken by the hands of demons?

For those he ever managed to track down. He found one squadmate on Phobos suspended by his own viscera and another’s still-twitching body impaled on a piece of rebar. The last one was…fortunately dead after what they’d done to him. Ashford was nowhere to be found.

Had he forgotten what was truly important? Perhaps he had forgotten what he fought for?

Had he forgotten her?

The Slayer arrived at the massive breach left on the surface of the Pyramid by the Retribution. He placed his hand on the edge of the aperture, feeling the lingering energy of the broken seals that had imprisoned him for so long. Absolute seals of both infernal and celestial origin, used by the highest powers in Creation to imprison the greatest force of destruction that ever existed, and Samuel Hayden had broken them all.

How did the cyborg ever do it?

The Slayer slowly took his hand of the rough stone before cocking his shotgun and stepping into the Pyramid.

He walked along a single long and straight corridor, footsteps echoing loudly across the featureless stone walls.

No matter how great their power, the Heresiarchs had not imprisoned him on their own. They’d received help from above. From the others. The cursed slumber they all placed him in had greatly placated his rage and calmed the Slayer down, that was for sure. Had that been the plan all along?

Whose plan was it?

The Slayer arrived at the heart of the Pyramid.

He stepped into a wide chamber whose every surface lay covered with strange shimmering runes and images. The spells of confinement, the seals of the five Heresiarchs, and the Slayer’s own Mark. Ethereal symbols filled the air as they floated from cracks in the ground, occasionally taking the form of vacant screaming faces, though the Slayer could sense no life or thought within the Black Pyramid. But these were not what he focused on.

In the center of the chamber was the sixth UAC ship, its structure unfolded into an arching manifold that stretched throughout the Pyramid’s interior. Despite its strange appearance, it appeared intact and unharmed from Hell’s dark magics. The interdimensional drive had been disengaged from the ship’s structure and retrofitted to form a provisional portal device. The armored body of the last red guard sat motionlessly by it, its helmet and face gouged out by its own hands. Apart from these two objects, the chamber was empty.

Feeling the quiet lingering air of a human presence still echoing within the Pyramid, he widened his senses one last time.

Within the chamber, the Slayer beheld the towering aura of Samuel Hayden standing stoically above a sealed stone sarcophagus. The cyborg paced softly around it, as if wary and apprehensive of what lay within, yet intrigued and fascinated.

Hayden reached out, and gently placed his hand on the sarcophagus. The Slayer thought he could see faint arcs of lightning spread from his hand to the inscribed stone surface.

What did the cyborg have to do with all this?

How did he find him? How did he break the Pyramid’s seals? How did he return?

…

The Slayer listlessly slumped his shoulders. Perhaps he really had lost it.

If he kept standing still like an idiot, doing nothing but thinking to himself, he might as well build a new sarcophagus and go lie that one too. Perhaps he’d do a better job of detaining himself than the Elder Gods ever did!

He turned to the portal control terminal situated beside the transporter ring.

FORWARD RESEARCH STATION TELEPORT CONTROL

TARGET DESTINATION: UAC FACILITY RECEIVER

ACTIVATE PORTAL?

Focus, focus, focus. All things considered, the Slayer’s cursed slumber now allowed a unique opportunity for growth. Recovery of his old powers and arsenal was a given, but he now had the chance to recover his focus too. Not just immediate combat focus but long-term as well.

If the Argent Fracture had been breached, Hell would send forward command units to Mars. No doubt a few minor Summoner-class demon lords, but perhaps a pair of Barons as well. The Barons would settle somewhere on the planet and command the entirety of the invading force, while the Summoners would begin reverse-engineering the UAC’s ships to build vehicles conducive to demonic travel across space. With sights for Earth.

First things first. The Slayer would have to find the Martian Spaceport and destroy any remaining human vessels to slow down the demon lords’ progress. Next came locating the hidden Summoners and Barons, dealing with them, and finally finding a way to close off the Martian Fracture for good.

That settled his long-term focus. At least for the near future.

As for short-term momentary focus, it was just a matter of time and practice, he supposed. As it’d always been. He’d been out of the sarcophagus on Mars for what, a few hours? As long as he stayed disciplined and stuck to his old routine, he’d be back in shape in no time.

The Slayer stepped into the transporter ring and reached for the control terminal.

He was going to make things right. For the Sentinels, for the Verimor, for the Corrax Alliance. For his fallen brothers, for his slain squadmates, for Ashford and Osborne. For her. And for Earth.

He exhaled. Here goes nothing.

He tapped the panel and triggered the portal activation button.

ERROR: SPACE-TIME SYNCHRONIZATION TO SELECTED DESTINATION NOT FOUND

His outstretched hand slowly clenched into a fist as the Slayer grit his teeth and trembled with rising fury.

He pulled back in preparation to smash the panel before noticing the second message on the screen.

REFRESH TRANSPORTER MATRIX?

The Slayer closed his eyes and shakingly tapped the refresh prompt, struggling to maintain his composure with every ounce of his will.

ACTIVE SPACE-TIME TRANSPORTER NODE FOUND!

TARGET DESTINATION: MARS SPACEPORT

ACTIVATE PORTAL?

…

The Slayer’s rage immediately evaporated though not without leaving a bitter taste in his mouth.

Whatever. As long as he could leave this godforsaken place already.

He tapped the activation button and looked on as the retrofitted portal device whirred to life, the drive core spinning above him as energy surged from the ship’s power banks into the expanding vortex.

The Slayer poised himself in decisive anticipation as he was flung through the rift between dimensions.

He was going back to the Mortal Realm.

Back to Mars.

And when he did, there was going to be Hell to pay.








+++

With one last defiant roar, the Icon of Sin breathed its last.

The Slayer stood still as the Titan collapsed before him. The building he was on shook at the gargantuan's collapse, sending dust and debris flying. It would seem that would be the Titan's final resting position but its massive weight couldn't just support the body and the corpse fell backwards into the dark abyss below.

The Slayer strode forward towards the edge to watch his foe's fall but to his mild disappointment, dark clouds obstructed his vision. Oh well. He could still at least take satisfaction that the Icon of Sin had died at his hands.

"Well done, Slayer." came the applauding robotic voice of Samuel Hayden, former Chairman of the UAC, active Director of the ARC and now a voice living inside his suit's systems."The Icon of Sin is dead. Khan Maykr is dead and Urdak will soon fall to Hell. Even Hell itself is thrown into chaos thanks to you. And now Earth...Earth is now shielded from its enemies." Even with his existence reduced to being a passenger to world events, the robotic doctor still managed to sound insufferable and resolute as if his current circumstance was mild inconvenience that could be overcome.

Hayden continued, disregarding the growing irritation from the Doom Slayer. "Today will be remembered as the Last Day of Armageddon. Tomorrow, it will be a brave new world and Earth will look to you for guidance." At that, the Slayer turned from looking at the cloud-filled abyss below and began to walk away, his tasks completed.

For the time being.

"My contacts in the Allied Nations Council still live and the ARC still takes directives from me. We can still rebuild and recover what we have lost. I propose that we-" Hayden explained but the Slayer paid no heed to the scientist. He had no interest in playing bureaucrat neither did he want to run Hayden's errands again. Pockets of demonic stragglers still existed and they needed to be hunted down and cleansed. Furthermore, he had to prepare to deal with the consequences of Khan Maykr's death. The last thing Earth needed was a surprise invasion.

"...establish contact with the nearest ARC holdout. We can begin from there. I sha-"

"E????x?????c??????e???l?????l???e????n?????t????!?????" a voice suddenly said aloud. It was dark. It was heavy. It was alien. Moving fast, the Slayer stood on guard, his eyes scanned the world around him for targets but he found nothing but ash, smoke and fire.

Spoiler: BGM: Cegorach's Theme

A gauntleted hand reached out to grasp for his weapons but to his alarm, he couldn't move a muscle. Alarmed cries came from Hayden but the scientist and the world began to distort violently, blurring reality to an indescribable point. The Slayer was helpless as he was raised in the air, his body slowly glowing with light.

"Y???o???u???'???l???l??? ???m???a???k???e??? ???t???e???r???r???i???f???i???c??? ???p???u???n???c???h???l???i???n???e???,??? ???S???l???a???y???e???r???.??? ???M???a???k???e??? ???i???t??? ???a???b???s???o???l???u???t???e???l???y??? ???h???i???l???a???r???i???o???u???s???!???"

The last thing he saw before darkness claimed his vision was the face of a smiling clown looking down at him with bright and amused eyes, its deranged laughter echoing in his ears.

+++

"This is Checkpoint Charlie! We are being overrun by heretic forces. Requesti-arghh!"

"Fire for effect! Fire for effect! My positions being taken!"

"This is my company's last stand! Lieutenant Firefly out!"

First Lieutenant Talia Hall cursed aloud as she heard the slow rumble of threads heading their way. Sure enough, a heretic Leman Russ tank revealed itself through the black smoke. Gone was its original and holy form. The Heretics had painted the tank red and had adorned it with their unholy sigils. It took all her willpower not to scream in rage as she spotted the rotting forms of Guardsmen nailed to the tank.

"Heretic armor! Everyone, take cover!" she yelled through her vox as she dropped through her knees.

There was a deafening roar as the Leman Russ outside unleashed its fury at the building Talia and her platoon took cover in. Following the tank's barrage, there was an explosion as men and material were sent flying. When the dust had settled, a hole had been blown in the building and several guardsmen lay dead or dying.

Recovering quickly, Talia pushed herself up and roared.

"Everyone back up! We must not surrender our position to the heretics! Defend this position with your lives!" Her platoon roared their affirmatives as they pulled themselves back up to unleash righteous fury upon the advancing heretic forces on the road below.

"THEY DEFY US, FAITHFUL!" came a voice heavily distorted by electronic speakers. "CLAIM THEIR HIDES FOR CHAOS!"

The bloodthirsty hordes outside their shelter roared in delight and their excitement manifested itself in the renewed intensity of their attacks. Despite this, Talia was unfazed as she took cover by the window overlooking the road.

"Where the frak are those anti-tank missiles?" she yelled into her vox.

"Coming right up, ma'm!" A guardsman answered. Talia levelled her lasgun and fired upon a heretic making himself conspicuous. She cursed once more as the Leman Russ turned its turret towards her window.

"Make it fast, guardsman! The damned tank is staring right at me!" the woman yelled. There was a grunt of affirmation followed by a rocket screaming from their shelter. The sharp-tipped rocket sailed through the air and made a punch straight through the tank's armor. Talia prayed to the Emperor for the rocket to deliver justice towards the fools that dared turn their backs on the one true God. Thankfully, the Emperor smiled upon her that day and the Russ detonated in a brilliant display of fire and light.

Despite the loss of their tank, it seemed to be of no consequence to the heretics who began to yell frenzied cries. Talia's eyes widened in recognition.

"They're preparing to charge our position! Brace yourselves, Cadians!" the woman yelled. The Cadian platoon that found itself presented with unfavoruable odds gave their own roars of defiance as they steeled themselves. It was at this junction that Talia analyzed their situation.

Their shelter was a three story administrative building, the entrance had a marble facade with two large pillars of pure marble. The second floor had a balcony which her platoon used to deploy their heavy bolter emplacement but they had long run out of ammunition for it. Her men were doing their best with what they had left and she was more than confident that they'd give the heretics one hell of a fight. However, that was the extent of it. They could smash the traitor's teeth in but they could not expect to live another day.

Oh well. It wasn't as if they were expected to do more anyway. Their job was to defend the rear and delay the enemy long enough for the main loyalist force to slowly retreat. They were already consigned a death sentence. Might as well make it such an end.

It was at this conclusion Talia readied her lasgun for what could be the final time.

"Men and women of the 212th! This could very well be our final stand. Right outside the walls, the heretics prepare to charge our positions. Our orders were clear as day; hold your ground to the very last. The purpose of our orders is to give the Inquisitor time to redirect our forces towards Hive City Borealis and prepare its defenses. So many people are counting on us and we will not fail them!" declared Talia, her eyes scanning the smoke and ruin filled streets before them. Through the smoke, corpses and debris, she could hear the thundering sound of boots and shrieks coming their way. She stole a glance at her own soldiers and found them in poor condition. Many of whom hadn't slept for days and were forced to deal with all manners of degradation and hardship.

However, despite their suffering, their eyes still burned as brightly as ever. They were Imperial Guard and Cadians to boot. They were all used to this sort of thing and it was all Talia needed as the confirmation of their resolve. But still, the Cadian lieutenant wanted to hear what they had in their hearts.

"212th! I give to you my final orders. They shall not pass! They shall die here and meet our bayonets, our fists, and our fury! Do you get me, you maggots?"

A unified chorus of ayes greeted her.

At that, Talia prepared herself for her last act in the material world. Oh by the Emperor she was ready to do this. Her heart pumped blood like it had never pumped before. Her fingers twitched as it rested on the trigger on her lasgun, just waiting for the Heretics to come in range. Her eyes, a bright purple hue that the braver men of her company called pretty, glowed with purpose and clarity.

She was going to die here and by the Emperor, she was going to go out on her terms.

Despite her willingness to give her life right where she stood, there was still a little voice in her mind that prayed for salvation; that still dared to dream of rescue and hope. It was this tiny voice in her mind that began to pray and ask for deliverance to He that Sat in Terra.

Little did she know that the He would answer her prayers.

As the first few heretics began to charge in through the smoke and just as the Cadians were about to unleash fury upon the charging hordes, the world began to change.

The smog-filled sky turned from its hellish red hue to a dull grey one as all color seemed to fizzle out. Many - both Loyalist and Traitor alike - paused in their battle, turning their gazes to the sky as a circle formed amongst the clouds. Suddenly the fabric of reality was torn as if someone had taken a blade and cut open the sky like a sheet of paper. From this rift in space a flash of yellow light thundered down upon the battlefield, crashing to the earth between the two factions with a force that sent all who stood too close flying.

As the dust settled and both sides scrambled to their feet, they beheld a man wearing a green-plated suit of armour with a visored helmet kneeling amidst embers of rock and dust. He had no visible weaponry save for what looked like a wrist-mounted chainsword of sorts and a shoulder-mounted weapon.

From her vantage point, Talia could see that despite the visor-obstructing the wearer's face, it did not hide his eyes. Never before in her entire life had she seen such eyes that glowed with intensity. She was no psyker but even she could detect the emotions flowing through those bright orbs. Confusion, alertness, rage...

The man scanned her and her squad first. Talia gulped as the man scanned them with such careful scrutiny that she swore that her soul was being judged. A few of her guardsmen bristled at him and the soldier right next to her shivered violently that he could have fired his lasgun at any second. This action did not got unnoticed by the armored man whose eyes narrowed at the Cadian.

Talia quickly made herself conspicuous, standing tall and proud as any Cadian should and laid a authoritative hand on the man's shoulder to calm him down. She knew she was risking herself for a unknown outcome but something in her told that the armored figure wasn't here to harm them. Her luck was solid for the Cadian quickly went back to his senses and lowered his rifle. The green-clad figure in turn softened his glare, locking eyes with her for a second until he then turned towards the Heretics behind him who slowly but surely returned to the present.

It was fortunate then that the Heretics possessed the diplomatic ability of a slime and the assembled traitors lobbed insults and threats at the green-clad figure. It was there Talia noticed the aura surrounding the man changed from cautious curiosity to one that she was all familiar to.

Rage.

One of the heretics strode forward, a man with ugly scars on his chest with even more ugly scars on his face. He raised his weapon, a boltpistol at the armored man. Talia momentarily thought that the heretic was going to shoot the green-armored interloper but it was not to be.

With speed never seen before, the heretic's head was quickly removed from his shoulders as the armored figure activated his wrist mounted chainsword.

When the body fell back, blood oozing from the stump, the two armies regained their senses, and chaos in the literal sense erupted around them.

+++

A/N: A bright day to all.

This fic is going to be a soft reboot of Rip and Tear mostly due to the new lore additions of DOOM Eternal and of me not really being satisfied with the way Rip and Tear is heading. Hopefully, this will be just as enjoyable for you guys.

Here's a link for those who haven't read it yet: https://forums.spacebattles.com/threads/rip-and-tear-doom-warhammer-40k.526708/

On other matters, I hope ya'll are a-okay from the Corona virus. Don't freak out, wash yourself and eat yer fruits and vegetables and ya'll be fine.

+++

"I know what you are thinking Slayer." came the cool tone of Hayden as he implored the Slayer to stifle his growing rage. "We cannot afford to antagonize anyone. I urge you to be diplomat-"

Any chance at diplomacy however was shattered when the clearly corrupted man in front of them had his head removed from his shoulders.

At this, Hayden let out a long-suffering sigh.

The Slayer could hardly care what the robotic scientist thought of him. There were the corrupted to deal with.

He rushed forward, faster than what a normal human mind could comprehend. Activating his chainsaw, he cut through a large swathe of corrupted, spilling bone, blood and sinew in a whirlwind of violence and gore. His victims never knew what befell them until it was too late, faces twisting in horror as their limbs and other extremities were detached from them. Those he could not get to with his chainsaw, the Slayer got to with his flames.

Searing flames spewed forth from his shoulder-mounted Equipment Launcher and burnt scores of corrupted. Screams of pain and terror exited their lips as the purifying flames of the Slayer consumed them. Their bones charred, their flesh peeled and the generous amount of oxygen they breathed became good kindling for the flames to grow even more brighter and violent.

The mass of corrupted appeared to regain their senses after seeing their comrades die painful deaths. Cries of wrath and promises of death bellowed from their throats as they charged him. Their attempt however was fruitless for they were mere pests compared to Him.

He who spent countless eons laying waste to Hell and its forces. He who had slain the mightiest champions the Dark Realm could throw at him. He who had slain Titans, Divine Beings and the Icon of Sin itself.

He was a Sovereign of the Night Sentinels, the Unchained Predator, the Hell Walker.

The DOOM Slayer.

And he was not happy.

If one could feel his anger, one would be roasted alive. What the Slayer had in him was complete and utter rage. Rage for the fact something had plucked him from his greatest triumph. Rage because demons were still causing untold suffering back on Earth. Rage that the Corrupted before him simply existed.

Thankfully, they appeared to be happily volunteering themselves as his stress relief.

"They are not our Corrupted." Hayden suddenly said aloud from within his suits systems. The Slayer had just twisted a man in twain when he heard the scientist speak.

Before he could do anything more, the scientist continued. "They do not emit Hell's taint. I can still sense something from them but it is unfamiliar." The Slayer said nothing as he continued to hack and slash at the corrupted. While he did not make a habit of learning the intrinsic nature of his foes, he had to admit that the scientist had a point.

A single glance at the forces arrayed against him had told him they were different from the enemy he was used to fighting. It was clear as day that they were corrupted by something but it wasn't Hell. Thanks to the power boost he received from the Seraphim and eons of experience fighting otherworldly entities, he had developed higher and more keener senses. Just like Hayden, the Slayer sensed something was very wrong in the men and women he was fighting.

"Look at the symbols they adorn themselves." chided Hayden. At this point, the Slayer had took hold of another cultist and had snapped the man's neck. The Slayer nodded and quickly scanned the man's body and found a marking that was tattooed on his back. Said marking was that of a eight-pointed star.

"I've never seen anything like this. Even in Hell and Urdak." The honesty and uncertainty in Hayden's voice almost caught the Slayer off guard. Among all things that he didn't expect to see from the UAC director, it was those two.

"Leave your pondering later. You are still surrounded, remember?" chided Hayden, as if he could sense the thoughts coming from his mind. The Slayer shrugged as he went back to his work and unleashed another torrent of violence at the enemy.

+++

"By the Emprah, look at him go!"

"Camillus! Get the pict machine! Record this frakking stuff!"

"Take that you traitorous bastards!"

The men and women of the 212th watched and cheered as their sudden savior tore through the heretic ranks like a hot knife through butter. The guardsmen walloped as the green Astartes - for what else could he be? - tear into the traitors' ranks with a ferocity and rage they had never seen before. They cheered as the Astartes took hold of two charging cultists and smashed them together like coconuts. They laughed as he tossed aside one and began to use the other as a makeshift club, the eight-pointed star on the cultist's back helping in that process. They roared in triumph as the Astartes delivered a punch so hard that it had shattered a heretic's chest, spreading bone and pulverized heart in a grisly display of gore and violence.

"Lieutenant Talia! What are your orders?" cried aloud a nearby guardsman. This had the effect of knocking the Cadian lieutenant back to her senses. Her cheeks reddened in embarrassment. Too engrossed was she in the brilliant display of the Emperor's fury that she even momentarily forgot how to breathe! Taking a deep breath, both to let oxygen back into her system and as a way to prove she had a plan incoming, the Cadian lieutenant grinned.

"Men! Take this as an example of the Emperor's love for us! In our greatest time of need, he hasn't abandoned us and sent us a champion to make this an even fight!"

Laughter erupted through the vox network, amusement and hope rising as they witnessed the Emperor's herald make absolute mincemeat of the heretic forces.

"My orders still stand! Defend this position and make those heretics rue the day they turned their backs on the Emperor! For Cadia and the Imperium!" she roared as she fired her lasrifle at the enemy.

"Huzzah!" roared the 212th in affirmative, unleashing their weapons at the disarrayed heretics.

Faith renewed and hope rekindled, the Cadian 212th poured righteous fury into their fusillade. Cadian marksmanship was one of the finest the Imperial Guard had ever seen. As their homeworld was literally right next to the Eye of Terror, each Cadian had been trained since birth to be soldiers and by the Emperor were they excellent soldiers.

They picked their targets and fired. The more skilled of the 212th provided covering fire for the Astartes. While he was indeed a warrior without peer, he was alone and his back needed to be watched sometimes.

Lt. Talia was one of those sharpshooters, diligently disposing of whatever heretic that came too close towards the Astartes. Watching the warrior work was just like watching a farmer thresh his wheat. The Astartes was brutal in his administration of Imperial justice but his brutality was also focused, with meaning. Not like the senseless hacking and slashing of Chaos cultists. He would simply dish out the proper punishment towards the traitors and then move on from the next.

With lasgun, saw, fists and that shoulder-mounted weapon of his, the Astarte killed score after score of cultists. The streets lined with the bodies of the broken, each cadaver having died in ways she never even thought of possible. The Emperor's Throne-sent Champion never faltered and never paused, letting the heretics know that there was no other end for them other than death.

This change she felt in the air. As an officer, she was able to develop a sense of sorts to read into the aura of a battle. The aura before the champion's arrival was one of quiet despair and forlorn hope. That all changed however when he arrived, dropped off by none other than the Emperor himself from the Golden Throne to turn the tide of the battle. Where there was once despair, it was now faith. When hope was forlorn, it returned in full force.

They were winning the battle. There was no denying it.

The victorious feeling she had was short-lived however when she saw them.

"Chaos Space Marines!" she yelled in alarm.

There were two of them. The first was armed with a chainsword while the other held a powerhammer. Oozing with malevolence and hate, they eyed the Astartes who was laying waste to their heretical brethren.

Talia would not waste anytime. She wasn't about to let the Emepror's champion be killed off by two power-armor wearing brutes!

"I need a rocket launcher ASAP! The Astarte is in danger!" she yelled into her vox. Cries of alarms and affirmatives were returned to her. As her men scrambled for the launchers, Talia watched as the traitor Space Marines attacked.

+++

The Doom Slayer said nothing as he relieved another man's head from his body. His deranged partner, a woman with hair dyed blue, screamed in agony as the man fell. She tried to rush the Slayer with her weapon, a hell-damned scissor-sword. Her reward for her display was a laser blast to the face.

By King Novik, how deranged were these people?

At the very least, there were still some with wits about them who used real and proper weapons. Such weapons he liberated from their previous owners and was now using to their full capacity.

The rifle he dubbed the lasgun was proving to become his favourite. A gun with perfect accuracy, and whose fire couldn't be evaded due to moving at the speed of light? Yes please.

With precision aim, the Slayer sent his targets into the afterlife. Their bodies now steaming with coin-sized holes in their chests. He didn't stay at a fixed position however. He was mobile, dispatching targets as he passed. He jumped high into the air and activated his equipment launcher which then lobbed grenades at the mass of corrupted. He felt no glee when he disposed of his enemies but even he had to admit the sight of limbs and legs being tossed around as a grenade exploded was a brilliant sight.

As he was about to land, he picked a unfortunate man to be his landing pad. The man, sensing his impending fate of being squished, unleashed everything that his weapon had at the Slayer. It was a fruitless labor however as the Slayer landed on the man, crushing him underneath his boots. Upon landing, the Slayer discarded the lasgun he had and swiftly retrieved the swift man's weapon.

It was another lasgun but that was fine for the Slayer. He wo-

The Slayer cursed as he felt a heavy blow strike him from the back, sending him flying towards the ground. Standing quickly on his feet, the Slayer turned to face the one that had striked him.

He was in armor, and blurred the line between man and demon. He stood head and shoulders above even the tallest corrupted, his thick and bulky armor festooned with skulls, etched in brass and adorned with spikes. He had two horns emerging from his helmet, a decaying skull on each one. In his hands was a hammer that oozed with dark power and promise.

"I am Diavola of the-"

The Slayer said nothing as he simply targeted the armored warrior with a grenade. The projectile sailed in the air and struck the Chaos Marine's face. Using this to his advantage, the Slayer rushed forward towards the Marine and fired his last grenade at the Marine who dropped his hammer down the concrete. The Slayer then holstered his Lasgun as he reached for the hammer. At this point, the Marine had recovered and elicited a enraged yell at the audacity of the Slayer. He too reached for his hammer but the Slayer was faster. Armed with the hammer, the Slayer delivered a deft blow towards the Chaos Marine's chestplate, cracking the ceramite plate.

The marine stumbled back, coughing blood and phlegm into his helmet. When he returned his attention back towards the Slayer, the last thing he saw before the dark claimed him was of the Slayer's eyes glowing with incandescent hatred and of his own hammer swinging down at his face.

"For Chaos Undivided!" he heard another voice scream, distorted by electronic speakers. The Slayer pulled back the hammer, and prepared himself for combat. It came in the form of another armored warrior who screamed battle-cries as he charged the Slayer, a revving chainsword in hand. The Slayer charged forward and met the challenger head on. In a clash of steel, the two met. Hammer against chainsword. Divine against Corrupted.

"I will claim your head for Chaos!" bellowed the Marine. The two struggled as they attempted to overpower one another. The Chaos Marine looked to have the upper hand. Millennia of war had sharpened him and his genetic augmentation and the blessings of the Dark Gods had strengthened him. Unfortunately, he was not the Doom Slayer.

The Slayer who had spent eons in ceaseless combat. The Slayer who had been granted power unimaginable by the Seraphim. The Slayer who was very, very angry at the Chaos Marine's existence.

He let slip his left hand and with the flick of finger, activated his chainsaw. He thrust it forward towards the Chaos Marine's armored belly, chipping away bits of ceramite. The Chaos Marine was no pushover however and delivered a stinging kick that sent the Slayer and his hammer flying. The Slayer landed on his feet, feeling the blow in his system. The Marine roared in triumph. Holding aloft his chainsword, the Chaos Marine moved to charge.

As the Slayer prepared himself for the armored warrior to reach striking distance, a rocket flew from somewhere and struck the Chaos Marine, disorientating him. Seeing his chance, the Slayer crossed the distance between himself and the warrior. He poured his rage and frustration into his strike, raising his hammer and smashing it straight towards the marine's face, bringing him to his knees. Remarkably, the Chaos Marine still had some life left in him. The Slayer rectified this problem by raising his hammer once more and with all his might, smashed straight into the armored warrior's chest, sending pieces of plate and flesh flying.

With this, the Slayer took the moment to see where the rocket had come from. He turned his back towards the administrative building and found the humans inside now firing down upon the corrupted. Despite the brilliant flashes of light coming from the building, he was able to focus on where the rocket had come from and found the trail belonging to a brown haired woman with purple eyes cheering him on.

The Slayer nodded at the woman who froze at the attention. He could see her face turning crimson but the Slayer paid no mind to it as he turned back towards the Corrupted.

There was still work to be finished. The only thing left for him to do was to Rip and Tear.

Until it was done.

+++

A/N: New update! I hope you guys enjoy!

On other matters, there were certain things in the original Rip and Tear that I didn't like and also some things that I missed. I hope to rectify those things here.

+++

A long suffering and weary sigh escaped from Talia's lips as she sat down on a piece of marble, her lasgun resting on her legs. A soft breeze flowed into the town, cooling down the lieutenant and those who deigned to enjoy the comforting wind. It was a brief respite however as the wind carried with it the stench of war and death.

She took in another breath and sighed.

"Tell me Sergeant....how many did we lose today?" Her tone was heavy and emotional. She hated asking this question but it was necessary for her to know.

A gruff man that had stood silently behind her sighed as he sat next to her.

"We lost fifty hands with a hundred more seriously wounded." said Veteran Sergeant Jonas Iscariot, a grim look about his face. He reached into his pack and brought out cigar and a Guard-issue lighter. He offered it towards Talia but the woman smiled slightly .

"Sorry Sergeant. I still and will not smoke" gently rebuked the woman. Sergeant Jonas grunted as he simply lit up the cig and brought it into his mouth.

The Veteran Sergeant, as his titled implied, had seen countless engagements in his lifetime. His record showed on the scars that were etched onto his face. One particular scar was on his right eye. The Sergeant claimed that he had received it while fighting Eldar at some point though he couldn't remember when. Talia was inclined to believe him, considering that the sergeant was no-nonsense character that didn't tolerate foolishness.

"We've won." stated the sergeant as he breathed out a puff of smoke. A sad smile formed on Talia's lips as she turned her attention towards the numerous guardsmen piling up the bodies of their dead for a funeral pyre.

"Aye. We have." muttered the lieutenant.

She would have been ecstatic at the thought of victory. But the 'victory' she experienced today left nothing but a sick and hollow taste in her mouth. So many of her own men...dead.

As if sensing her thoughts, Iscariot chimed in.

"Don't weep because your men have passed, Lieutenant. Be grateful instead that such men had lived." His tone was rough and blunt, but comforting. His purple eyes seemed dead but if one looked closely, they would see life burning intensely.

A puff of smoke exited his lips once more as he turned his attention towards the bodies being assembled. "They gave their lives properly, without any hesitation and fear. The loss of life is a tragedy but if those lives are lost for a foolish errand, then it's a greater tragedy." He turned his attention back towards Talia and laid a comforting hand on her shoulder pauldron, a look of warmth now present in his once grim visage.

"Don't think of yourself inadequate, lieutenant. You have led us admirably and strongly. Some of us have died but some of us have also lived as well. Imagine how many more would be lost if you hadn't taken over after Captain Jellico's death." He smiled as he gave her a light pat on the back.

"So take heart and be strong. As of now, your men need a strong leader. And that strong leader is you."

Talia listened patiently and found comfort in her sergeant's advice. She smiled, a genuine and happy one, at the sergeant. "T-Thank you, sergeant. I'll keep your words in mind." The man scoffed as he stood from his marble seat.

"Thank the men, not me. I just acted as their herald." was what Talia heard as the sergeant walked off to join in the pyre crews. It was also at that moment where her vox began to fizzle to life. Talia quickly brought up to her ear.

In came the authoritative and aristocratic voice of the overall Imperial commander of the planet. A voice she found infuriatingly grating.

"This is Inquisitor Adrian Tanner to any Imperial forces hearing this broadcast. Does anyone copy?"

"The 212th Cadian Regiment copies, Lord Inquisitor." said Talia, hiding her distaste for the man with a neutral tone. As she finished speaking, silence filtered through the vox line. For a moment, Talia thought that the lines of communication were cut off once more. It proved to be a fleeting moment's concern as the Inquisitor spoke once more.

"The 212th?" Even if he was a voice on the vox, Talia could feel the shock and surprise in the man's voice. "Your regiment was reported lost last week in the Defense of Hive City Acheron."

Talia frowned, her mind flashing her images of a city on fire, of the screams of civilians and of...the body of a young girl. She shook her head from her memories and and glanced at the smog-filled sky.

"We were never destroyed, my lord. We only lost communications. I believe we re-established communications via a Krieg regiment. It was a armored battalion I believe." Talia replied, honestly not being able to remember the name of the Krieger Tank battalion they encountered during their retreat. She had heard stories of the Kriegers disapproving of retreats and of them shooting those that dared retreat so but they were strangely cordial. Their commander had granted the 212th use of their communications equipment and even loaned some to them.

The last thing she saw was of them heading back into their vehicles as they charged headfirst into the frontlines. While the 212th were pulling back, they were marching on into battle.

The sounds of paper being rifled around a table and of flesh being burnt brought the lieutenant back to her senses. She turned to its source and found her men in the process of lighting the funeral pyres.

"Ah yes, the Krieger 69th Armored Battalion." Was it her or did the Inquisitor become even more sleazy as he spoke? "Well. Welcome back into the world of the living, Guardsman. Unfortunately, it might be a temporary return if you do not evacuate immediately."

This caught Talia's attention and she listened closely to what the Inquisitor said next.

"Other rearguard units have successfully pulled back or were reported to have been overrun by Chaos forces. You are the last ones left currently actively standing." informed the Inquisitor.

"My regiment was able to hold strong, my Lord." Talia informed the man, a little pride in her voice. "We were able to receive help from the Emperor himself!"

There was an audible crack at the vox line.

"Help? From the Emperor?" Tanner muttered incredulously. Talia nodded dutifully as she cast her gaze towards the Astartes who was assisting her men with the pyres.

"Yes my lord. He sent an Astartes that fell from the sky in a comet of light. He assisted us in the defense of our position and utterly smashed the heretics that dared attack us!" she finished a little too passionately. A couple of her men who were resting nearby gave her curious glances, eliciting a small blush from Talia who attempted to make herself inconspicuous from their gazes.

"I...I see." coughed Inquisitor Tanner. "Does he have any heraldry?"

Purple eyes ran along the Astarte's frame and exposed, muscly biceps.

"Does he have any heraldry, guardsman?" Tanner asked once more, a little more force in his voice. At that, Talia realized that she had stared far longer than what was appropriate. The woman glanced around and internally sighed in relief that no one had seen her staring.

"No my lord. He wears no sigil except for a symbol on his helmet. It is some form of script that I cannot read." reported the Cadian. Her being an officer had allowed her access to education not available to the common guardsmen but by the life of her, she couldn't figure out what the frak the script on the Astartes helmet meant. Perhaps it was a mark of the Emperor?

"Has he made any hostile moves against you or your regiment?" inquired the Inquisitor, calmer now in tone.

Talia shook her head. "He hasn't my lord. Ever since he arrived, he has done nothing but aid me and my regiment against the Chaos spawns. I swear to you, on my honor as a Cadian and as a officer, that this is the truth."

This she earnestly believed in. Only the Emperor could send something as powerful and vengeful as the Astartes. Only something sent by the Emperor could make her and her men feel like they could take on the Warp and win. There was no way Chaos or possibly some heretical xeno god could produce something as magnificent and powerful as the astartes.

That thought was the height of foolishness.

"I ask that you hand the vox to him. Now."

There was a certain edge in the Inquisitor's voice that told Talia that telling him about the Astartes was a bad idea.

+++

"This is no longer our world. Nor universe for the matter." echoed the voice of Samuel Hayden.

The DOOM Slayer said nothing as he gently laid down the body of a soldier onto a pile of his brethren.

"Whether you like it or not, your fate is now tied with the men you have assisted. They look onto you with hope and admiration. When they see you, they know no fear."

Sure enough, he passed by pair of men that stood at attention and saluted him, eyes shimmering with respect and hope. He afforded the men a nod as he passed. Small smiles formed at their lips as they watched him work. The Slayer said nothing as he bent over to pick another fallen soldier.

"Are you going to assist them further and see where that road takes you? Or are you going to strike out on your own and let destiny take its course?" the scientist intoned.

The DOOM Slayer had formed a habit to ignore the nascent scientist's ramblings when it wasn't important but the question Hayden asked him had left him seriously pondering on what to do.

In this reality, there was no Hell. No Dark Lord's day to ruin. No Urdak that plotted and manipulated nor was there any UAC that would bring damnation to all. From what little he could place, he was in the planet of a interstellar Human empire led by a God-Emperor figure that was currently fighting other humans that had been corrupted by some enigmatic and wholly malevolent space entities called the Chaos Gods.

If he had to base that from the souls he had consumed.

Irritation was roused in him as he recalled the stinging that he felt when he absorbed the fallen souls of the corrupted. He would catch glimpses of profane rituals and degenerate acts all done in the name of their gods. Furthermore, he could hear dark whispers forming in his mind. Said whispers becoming even stronger the more souls he consumed.

Promises of more martial power. The promise of arcane knowledge. Of immortality and of infinite pleasure. If he had his helmet off, he would have spat at the offers made my these so called gods. He was the Doom Slayer, imbued with god-like powers by the Seraphim and champion of Earth. What could these so-called gods offer him that he already had?

A shudder of irritation coursed through him. On the topic of gods, that hideous clown figure was also probably another divine being in this reality. He had to find a way to get at that harlequin freak for taking him and his weapons and his Fortress.

Until he found a way, he would have to assist these...Imperials as much as he could. They sure as hell weren't his humanity but humanity was still humanity no matter the universe and there had to be someone to fight back the malevolence of hell.

Or its local equivalent at least.

Despite the stories portraying him as a figure of uncontrollable rage and anger, he wasn't totally a rage-filled testosterone monster. He had calmed down significantly ever since he had awoken from Mars and even had the time to pick up on his old hobbies. He also even picked up on grease-monkey and egghead books to keep his mind sharp and to assist with VEGA.

On the topic of VEGA...

He had little time in taking the AI out of Urdak as he had hastened to Earth to defeat the Icon of SIn and so had left VEGA back in Urdak. The AI was going to be witness to a bloodfest between Urdak and Hell. As the contract between the two realms had been thrown out of the window, war was going to come and Hell would consume the world Hayden called 'Paradise'

Thus the Slayer made a promise to himself. As soon as he found a way back into his reality, he would find a way to rescue VEGA.

He had grown fond of the AI and found it to be a much more pleasant partner than Hayden. At the very least, the AI didn't emit self-righteousness, petulance, and overbearing confidence that spoke of how good they were.

"My lord?" coughed a feminine voice.

The Slayer had lowered the body he was carrying into a pyre when he heard the woman speak. Finishing first his job, he nodded towards two nearby guardsmen to begin lighting their power then turned towards the source of the voice.

An awed look was on the woman's face as He tuned to face her. He had seen the look countless of times already and this time, it wasn't any different. He did not care for their praise. All he wanted was to get demon guts and tear them out of their extremities.

He would not speak, finding no reason to. And so, the Slayer nodded at the woman, acknowledging her.

Talia held her breath as she sized-up the Astarte in front of her. She took note of his graceful speed despite his heavy bulk. She took note of the way his exposed biceps glistened in the sunlight and by the Emperor did she take note of the way his eyes bored into her as he looked.

She cleared her throat, hoping to drive away the awkward air that was now settling in between them.

"My lord." She swore to the Emperor that she didn't mean to emphasize on the 'my' part. "Firstly, I never got the chance to properly thank you for assisting us in the battle against the heretic forces. I would like to remedy that and with my most sincere gratitude, give you the 212th's thanks. If you hadn't come, my troops and I would have been sent directly to the Emperor."

The Slayer nodded, taking the woman's thanks in stride. He was rather surprised that he could understand the woman. He assumed that she'd be speaking some other space fantasy language.

"I'm translating for you." Hayden chimed in once more, souring the Slayer's pleasant mood. "The woman is speaking a mix of English, German, French, and Latin. This is a fascinating language combination I have to admit. Keep on letting woman talk. I'm going to be cataloging her words."

Talia shivered when she saw the Astarte's mood suddenly sour for a second. His helmet was rather transparent and she could see the hardening look on his eyes.

"My lord?" she suddenly squeaked. That brought the Astartes back to his senses and his gaze softened immediately as soon as he saw the look on her face.

Clearing her throat once more, Talia turned towards the administratum building that had once been their shelter from the heretic forces.

"Secondly, I would like to inform you that Inquisitor Tanner would like to speak with you. He is currently acting as the planet's overall military commander. It's unusual but High Command was utterly devastated when the heretics landed. He's the only one with any proper authority left on the planet." She found it distasteful that the Inquisitor had hijacked local PDF and Astra Militarum forces present in the planet but he was quick to wrestle control ever since High Command was lost to Chaos. He had been competent at keeping Loyalist forces together and in keeping Chaos largely away from breaching the last stronghold of Imperial power in the planet so his authority was accepted.

Talia found it distasteful but the man was good at this job. She wasn't petty enough to hate him for that.

Returning to reality, the Cadian lieutenant found the Astartes deep in thought, as if he was considering her words carefully. After a few moments deliberation, the Astartes nodded and bade her to lead him.

Talia smiled.

Spoiler: Extra Sauce (Not Canon)
+++

A/N: And here's another update. I plan to fart out at least two updates per week at the most with one at the minimum.

I hope you guys enjoy. Have a good one ya'll

+++

Inquisitor Adrian Tanner, Ordo Malleus, stared at the vox equipment that was on the dark oak desk infront of him.

This was a new development.

A so-called miracle sent by the Emperor himself, laying waste to Chaos elements without so much a scratch on him and done so all by his lonesome. On hearing this, his soul was split. The other half screamed at him to be on guard at this new development. To be wary at the face of this so-called miracle. If an Inquisitor wasn't suspicious then that Inquisitor was an incompetent one. This mantra was drilled into him ever since he became an Inquisitor, safeguarding the Imperium of Man with his colleagues from the vile influence of the Xeno, Mutant, and Heretic.

However, with all that was happening in the galaxy as of late, he wasn't sure if he could afford to be suspicious.

Reports had been coming in of strange tidings in Cadia. Whispers of another Black Crusade led by the Despoiler himself flowed through the Inquisitorial grapevine. Furthermore, Chaos activity was surging all throughout the galaxy.

The world he was in was further proof that the galaxy and by extension, the Imperium, was going to experience a new chapter of darkness.

He glanced at a nearby banner at the far side of his room.

The Astartes, the Cadian lieutenant had said earlier, displayed nothing but immense abhorrence for Chaos and its worshipers. She even went on to describe how exactly the Astartes showed that abhorrence. Furthermore, he had assisted them in burning their dead and showed no manner of hostility whatsoever, keeping a tight lip and not bothering to take off his helmet.

If Adrian had to consider the plausibility of the situation, then the Astartes was most likely a Space Marine on a Warrior's Pilgrimage. That would fit his exemplary feats of total and utter hatred for the heretics attacking the 212th. That wouldn't explain his method of appearance however. A comet of light falling through the sky? Reality being cut in two for said comet to enter?

It was either the work of Chaos or intervention of the Emperor himself.

Adrian paused his train of thought. His mind fizzled as an image played in his mind.

+++

The runes took shape as the xeno blew into them. At that, symbols surrounded her like moths drawn to a flame. The Space Marine next to him moved to raise his bolter and fire but Adrian reached out and placed a gloved hand on the marine's weapon. The marine looked at him and even if his helmet blocked his face, Adrian could feel the confusion behind his lenses.

"Lower your weapon, Marine. Let us see what the witch has to say." He ordered. Hesitantly, the Space Marine lowered his bolter. It was at that point the xeno began to spoke.

"Death comes to claim the light of this world." The xeno witch began. "The lowly peon, the snake and the guilty band together under a Son of Iron to claim this world. This cannot come to pass however if He arrives to challenge them."

"Who is this challenger?" Adrian found himself asking. He could feel the witch smirking under her helmet.

"He shall come in a comet of fire. A warrior of skill and will. He is much like you but so much more. The Immaterium will quake at his arrival for he has once walked in that plane before. And he shall do so again."

He strode towards the foul witch, his eyes glaring at her.

"Who is he!?" he all but demanded.

"The Herald of Doom."

+++

Going back to reality, the Inquisitor sighed.

Perhaps this was the so called challenger the witch had prophesied. Or maybe not.

Until he spoke with and saw the marine himself, he was going to withhold his opinion.

It was at that moment that the vox came to life and in came the low and soldierly voice of the Cadian lieutenant.

"Lord Inquisitor. This is Lieutenant Hall. I have here the marine as requested." said the Lieutenant. Tanner leaned onto the table, his fingers crossed.

"Greetings, Inquisitor Tanner." came an electronic and synthesized voice. If Tanner had to compare it to someone, the image of a techpriest came into mind. This was not what he expected.

"You are the Astartes?" He questioned.

"No. I am not the one you refer to as Astartes. I am Doctor Samuel Hayden. I am an...associate of the Astartes. A passenger along his journey if you will." admitted the voice. Tanner eye's narrowed at the admission. And a doctor? What in the Emperor's name was a doctor? His instincts screamed at him to have the two arrested right then and there but he reigned that voice in. For the good of the Imperium, he had to know more about them. Information was power and the Imperium needed that power more than ever.

"Why does the Astartes not speak? What is your purpose here in this world?" Tanner asked once more, setting aside his suspicions.

"He does not speak because he only speaks when he needs to. I do not recommend forcing him." Hayden advised the Inquisitor, keeping his tone level and collected but his phrasing implied that trouble would arise if the Astartes was forced into a corner. Serious trouble. Hayden then continued. "As for our reason being here, we do not know. We did not come here by choice, I assure you. The Astartes had just slain a being of immense power when we found ourselves thrown here. The good lieutenant here knows what happened next."

Tanner hummed at the information given to him.

Then he really was a Marine in the midst of a Warrior's Pilgrimage. If he remembered correctly, a Marine was to make unequaled deeds in battle in order to erase whatever shame he had committed before his Pilgrimage. This was a solemn and sacred tradition of the Space Marines and it wasn't really a surprise if the marine was a sullen and silent warrior who'd rather spend his time fighting the Imperium's foes rather than chatting.

This Marine must have traveled far and wide, fighting the foes of the Imperium and had been blasted by some strange magic that sent him here.

How strangely...convenient.

Tanner paused and considered his options.

He was of the Ordo Malleus, a sub-branch of the Inquisition dedicated in rooting out Chaos in whatever form it took and wherever it festered. Tanner held it deep in his soul that Chaos was to be stopped at all costs and no mercy given to those that fell before its influence. Throughout his tenure as an Inquisitor, he had seen all forms of how Chaos manifested itself. Guardsmen becoming obsessed with their equipment to the point of painting it in blood. Citizens suddenly practicing strange and questionable acts. Hell, even acts done out of selflessness and heroism could invite Chaos to fester and seep.

Adrian cursed silently under his breath.

His instincts begged him to have the Astartes arrested or placed under his custody. From there, he could decide more clearly. But could he afford to do so? The planet burned as Chaos murdered and pillaged. The forces left under his command, while determined, were outnumbered and outgunned. And to make his situation even more grim, no less than a million innocent souls were counting on him and whatever was left of the Guard to defend them.

He could assert his authority and contain the Marine or...utilize him in the defense of the planet.

The Inquisitor sighed as he stood from his seat and strode towards the window of his solar. His eyes scanned the Hive below and watched as refugees, citizens, arbites, and other masses of humanity prepare for the incoming Chaos attack on the Hive's gates. As he watched, a warcry echoed in his mind. He also remembered him. A marine in yellow armor incandescent with righteous fury as charged into the fray.

"For those we cherish, we die in glory!"

He sighed once more.

The Inquisitor later returned to his seat after a few moments of deliberation. He closed his eyes and took a deep breath. He and the planet needed help and he wasn't going to waste this opportunity. There was once last question to be asked however.

"Marine. I ask this of you." He began. His voice low and authoritative. "Do you fight for humanity?"

The voice, Samuel Hayden, spoke as soon as the question was asked. "If we didn't fight for humanity, Inquisitor. We wouldn't have assisted the lieutenant and left her to die. What we do, we do for the betterment of mankind." Tanner frowned at the conceitedness that dripped from the voice but he nevertheless nodded.

"Very well then. Lieutenant Hall!" he barked. The woman, who had been silent for the duration of the conversation, chimed in.

"Yes, my lord?"

Adrian continued. "Is the 212th still combat effective?"

"The 212th is always combat effective, my lord!" the woman replied in earnest. Adrian felt himself smile at the woman's determination.

"Excellent. I have a mission for you lieutenant." said the Inquisitor. "Tell me, what do you know of the Dark Age of Technology?"

+++

+++

A pair of glass lenses stared at her.

Scratch that. There were multiple pairs of glass lenses that were staring at her.

"I swear, there's more cheer in a graveyard." monologued Lieutenant Talia. As soon as her thoughts rolled; one of the lenses turned towards her. She mustered a awkward smile as she waved at the man seated across her. The man continued to stare at her, as if he was drilling into her soul, then looked away.

Talia blinked as she processed what just had happened.

While she and the 212th was more than willing to slog it out with who or whatever foe High Command pointed at, the truth of the matter was that her regiment was nearly decimated thanks to constant fighting. Senior officers and important materiel were lost and the command structure had been skewed courtesy to the Emperor-forsaken heretics that assaulted the planet's capital hive city, Acheron.

And so, the 212th found itself partnering with members of another regiment to enact the mission the Inquisitor set them out on.

A detachment of Kriegers.

"And other assistance." muttered Talia as she scanned the new additions to their merry little band.

Clad in dark green and bone white power armor, the Space Marine stood taller than the rest of the occupants inside the Valkyrie. A MK XII Ragefire-type Plasma Gun was slung under his arm and a Mk II Mars Pattern Power Sword was sheathed at his hip. The Astartes who identified himself as Raguel was silent, a meditative air around him.

Talia frowned as she turned towards the next addition.

Hair white as snow and a (infuriatingly) calming smile on her face, the oh so lovely Sister of Battle the Inquisitor identified as Cosette Jeanval stood a feet higher than her and was clad in silver armor draped by a white cloth. Armed with a Godwyn-De'az Pattern Bolter rifle that lazily sat on her armored thighs, the Cadian watched in irritation as the Sororitas leaned slightly closer to her seatmate.

The Astartes.

The Marine didn't look too out of place from her fellow guardsmen. In fact, if he hadn't had that shoulder-mounted weapon of his, she would have thought that he was another guardsmen but clad in a newer sort of armor. Talia had to silently admit that the armor he wore was rather fetching and she wouldn't mind if she could have a similar set of armor.

Feeling a set of eyes on her, Talia looked around and saw the Sororitas smiling at her. Talia blinked as the white-haired woman calming smile turned slightly mischievous as she leaned a tad closer towards the Marine. Talia watched in horror at the whole affair. Her horror turned into silent rage as the sororitas sent her a knowing wink. The Cadian turned to look at the Marine, dreading his reaction. Surprisingly, the Marine was unaffected by the whole affair. Instead, the Marine was staring rather intently at the Dark Angel astartes that was across him. Or rather, the plasma rifle that was slung around the Dark Angel's power armor.

Relief washed over the Lieutenant.

Then horror.

Why the bloody hell was she so worked out over this?

The woman pinched herself to get her mind out of the gutter. Sweating slightly, the lieutenant turned instead towards the servitor skull that was floating silently at the far end of the Valkyrie transport and recalled the series of events that had transpired.

+++

"Tell me lieutenant. What do you know of the Dark Age of Technology?" The Inquisitor questioned.

Talia blinked as she considered the Inquisitor's question. She remembered the stories that her father told her about the Golden Age of Humanity, where mankind reigned supreme and his might was unmatched by anything the galaxy had in store. She leaned forward to give her answer.

"It was the greatest age for humanity, Inquisitor. Our might and supremacy was unmatched." said Talia. The Inquisitor grunted in response.

'Indeed. It was truly our height as a species. So feared and mighty were we that even the Eldar and Ork hesitated to engage us. However, you and the Marine aren't here for a history lesson so I shall get straight to the point." harrumphed Inquisitor Tanner.

"A month before the Chaos invasion of this world, the Adeptus Mechanicus arrived here in full force to investigate rumors of an STC fragment in the polar regions of the planet. They sent forces to verify its claims and had indeed discovered something in the Mountains. However, all contact with the expeditionary force was lost. The only thing that the Mechanicus was able to detect were claims of daemons." explained the man. The sound of files being sorted passed through the vox line.

"That is the reason why I am here. But before I was able to arrive on said location however, the heretics landed. The rest you can figure out by yourself." finished the Inquisitor.

The hairs stood on Talia's body as her mind imagined what the Inquisitor was going to ask her next.

"What are your orders sir?" Talia squeaked. The Inquisitor didn't waste a beat as he spoke.

"I need you and the 212th to head over towards the Southern Mountains and investigate the STC for yourself. We have reason to believe that whatever STC inside is powerful and the last thing we need on our hands is for Chaos to get it for themselves." intoned the man.

Talia considered the man's words. There was truth in what he was saying. If the heretics found themselves an STC, it was going to be disastrous for the Imperium. However...

"My lord, I do not mean to sound defiant but aren't the Southern Mountains way far back behind enemy lines? Furthermore, my regiment has suffered egregious casualties and we are low on supplies. We also have no transports whatsoever." reported the Lieutenant.

The Inquisitor seemed to have considered her questions for he answered quickly.

"Exactly. That is the reason why we must move quickly before the STC is discovered by Chaos. So far, we have reason to believe that they are unaware of its existence." Inquisitor Tanner explained neutrally. "And don't be daft lieutenant. I am sending in Valkyries to transport your regiment. I am also dispatching a detachment of Kreigers to reinforce you as well as two members of my own retinue. They'll be resupplying you as well and taking your wounded back for triage. I cannot be present for this operation as I must prepare the defence of Borealis so I shall also be sending my own servo-skull to act as my eyes and ears. Do you understand me, lieutenant?"

Talia stood at attention. "Yes my lord!" she exclaimed enthusiastically, excited at the thought of leading such a daring mission.

"Good. I am trusting you with this mission, lieutenant. Failure is not an option. Succeed in this and the Imperium will have one less worry." At that, the Inqusitor turned his attention towards the other occupant of the room.

"Did you hear us loud and clear, Space Marine?"

"We heard you, Inquisitor." came the rumbling voice from the Astartes power armor. Talia found the voice to have the consistency of toffee and melted butter. "And there's no need to ask us. We will aid the lieutenant in the recovery of this STC."

"Thank you, Space Marine." Talia had to admit she didn't expect to hear the gratitude that was in his voice. "The people of Tantive IV place their hopes on you two. May the God-Emperor guide you in this mission."

Talia made the sign of the Aquila at the Inquisitor's words.

"May it be so."

She took a quick glance at the marine.

"Sure. Why not." rumbled again the voice.

+++

Going back to reality, Talia recalled the arrival of their reinforcements.

When the Valkyries had landed, the Astartes assisted in the distribution of supplies such as carrying around crates and other heavy gear. He also assisted in the transport of the sick and wounded into the Valkyries and even laid a comforting shoulder on the men who were most critical.

Then the Valkyrie that carried the Inquisitor's retinue arrived.

When they saw the Astartes and Sororitas arrive, they all bent the knee in their presence. All save for their savior.

"You will not bow in the presence of an astartes?" rumbled Roguel, his hand resting on his powersword. Talia grit her teeth at the disrespect the astartes granted towards her regiment's savior. Violating protocol, she glanced her head a bit higher to see how their savior would react.

The Marine stood tall, a crate of medical supplies in his hands. He did not move an inch at he stared up at the taller marine. Momentarily, Talia feared that they would come to blows but it did not come to pass. The Sororitas who had been quietly observing the Emperor's Herald suddenly dashed forward and stood between the Emperor's miracle and the Dark angel. She glared up at him with such a fury that Talia legitimately thought the marine was going to catch fire.

If the Dark Angel was rankled, his helmet hid his reaction. Instead, the Dark Angel nodded and pulled his hand back from his powersword. Seeing that, the sororitas face softened and her lips curled into a smile as she turned towards their savior. She strode forward and laid a comforting hand on the miracle's own.

Her gauntleted fingers then went from above and below the crate the herald was carrying, signifying that she wished to help. The space marine nodded and handed the crate to her. From then on, things went to normal as the sororitas, the herald and her guardsmen prepared themselves for the mission.

Talia sighed.

Throughout her years of service, she had never been privy to such fantastic events. If only her father could see where she was now. If only she could see her now.

Unknowingly, her hand reached into her pocket to clutch a pendant she kept. Clutching it, Talia could remember the smell of pie, auburn hair and the sweetest and most innocent smile she had ever seen.

"Do not worry, child. Someday, I shall avenge you!" Her mind swore.

Her focus went back to reality as the Valkyrie's vox system pinged.

"Attention, this is Valkyrie One speaking." rumbled the grainy voice of the Valkyrie's pilot. "We have successfully infiltrated the Chaos lines and are nearing our landing zone. Be advised, the blizzard outside is showing no signs of weakening. Prepare for exfil. Over and out."

The men and women inside the Valkyrie nodded and did last minute checks on their weapons. Talia took the opportunity to spy on the Emperor's herald who stole his gaze from the Dark Angel's plasma rifle and began to tend to his own weapons.

Talia chuckled and began to examine her own.

Soon, it was going to be showtime.

+++

"Emperor above, it's bloody freezing." complained a guardsmen.

"Frak me. I should have brought another bloody scarf." said another.

"Guardsmen! Cut the chatter." ordered Talia as she strode out of the Valkyrie's pad and into the snowy ground outside.

"Yes lieutenant." sullenly replied the guardsmen. Talia nodded to the men who was striding towards her.

"What are your orders lieutenant?" asked Sergeant Iscariot. Following him was the gas-masked and trench-coated form of the Krieger detachments commanding officer; a sergeant who identified himself as Krieger Model 69b #1945 or Alexis. Talia took the moment to scan the area around her.

The Inquisitor had given them the exact coordinates of the location of the STC and the pilots had followed it to latter. As of the moment, Valkyries were flying in low to deliver their payload of Cadians and Kriegers. They had the good fortune to land on a plateau that was just right next to the STC's location. The Inquisitor had revealed that the STC was housed in a temple like complex that had a massive courtyard and gate right before it.

Sure enough, she found the temple right where it was.

What she didn't expect were the corpses of heretic and mechanicus laying about in the snow as well as the destroyed remains of their support vehicles. The heretic ones were the most concerning to her however as they were considerably fresher than the mechanicus cadavers.

With all of this information, she turned to the sergeants.

"Sergeant Iscariot, have the men spread around and gather the bodies. Sergeant Alexis, have your men prepare us fortifications. We will need it just in case." she ordered. The men nodded and went of to act on the orders of the lieutenant. The cadian sergeant barking it aloud whilst the Krieger simply took out his spade, his own men following his example.

The heavy thudding of ceramic plate registered in Talia's ears. Turning around, she found the Dark Angel battlebrother scanning the field.

"They were here before us." he commented, his hands twitching on his plasma rifle.

"Should we be worried, my lord?" Talia questioned.

The Dark Angel craned his head towards her. "No. Carry on as you will guardsman." Raguel said, striding past Talia.

"But still keep your guard up. Lowering it will only invite disaster." came the familiar aristocratic voice of the Inquisitor. From the Valkyrie came the his servo-skull, followed by the sororitas and the Emperor's herald.

"My lord?"

"Follow me, lieutenant. Take only your most trusted men with you. We shall make this quick." the Inquisitor ordered as the servo-skull floated past her. The lieutenant nodded and went off to get Sergeant Iscariot.

As the Imperials and the Slayer strode off into the temple, a pair of baleful eyes watched them.

It had been doing nothing but watching ever since it had awoken. It had wanted to leave the Profane Place but a power it couldn't breach kept it and its brothers trapped.

So they watched and waited, attacking those that dared step foot on their prison.

When they saw the transports land, they relished at the thought of making the trespassers suffer.

Then they saw him.

Their ecstasy turned to horror. How could he be here? Wasn't he imprisoned in stone and chain?

Their horror then turned to rage as they remembered the countless that died by his hand.

No. No more shall die.

If someone should die, it shall be him and his corpse feasted upon by the faithful.

+++

A/N: And a new update. In the next one, we will see some merry old friends making a appearance.

+++

The first thing that Talia noticed was the smell.

To emphasize her point, one of the guardsmen began coughing violently and emptied his lunch in a nearby corner.

"By the Emperor, what happened here?" Sergeant Iscariot whispered, his tone low and breathy.

"Let us move on and not find out, Guardsman," muttered Inquisitor Tanner, his voice relayed through the servo skull that was now trudging ahead of the group. Talia gulped as she held her lasgun and strode after the skull.

They found the temple's doors had been opened and wasted no time entering.

Inside, they found a large and spacious hallway whose ceiling reached to the very top. Flanking the hallway were massive marble pillars that beheld inscriptions of sorts. Talia expected to find many things but corpses weren't one of them.

Mechanicus and Heretic, the hallway was littered with them. Their bodies were frozen in different positions, each telling a little story on how they might have died.

However, they were the lucky ones.

"I think I'm going to hurl," said one guardsman, his face turning into a shade of green. Talia followed his gaze and found him looking at the corpse of a heretic who was strung from the ceiling by two chains that had been sewn into his back. Upon closer inspection, Talia could see that another chain was pulling against his spine.

She quickly stole her gaze away from the horrific sight. The other guardsman wasn't so quick however and relieved both his lunch and breakfast onto the floor.

"Welcome to my world, Lieutenant." came the neutral voice of the Inquisitor from his servo skull. At that, Raguel strode past her, his heavy ceramite boots echoing in the dark and dead hallway. Talia feared that the marine was going to trample upon the corpses of the fallen. However, the space marine was careful, graceful even, as he took his steps. He avoided stepping on the Mechanicus corpses but showed no such consideration for the heretics.

"Inquisitor. Should we dispose of the bodies as well?" rumbled the Dark Angel.

"No. We move on. I don't want to waste any more time." ordered the Inquisitor. The servo skull turned sharply to the back. "We can mourn for the loyal later, Cosette. We honor them by finding out what they came for. Let us be on our way."

Talia turned to the back and found the mischievous sister moving one of the Mechanicus corpses into a much more peaceful and dignified position. There were only two words Talia could find on the woman and they were sorrow and grief. The grief was lost and a look of rage came upon the Sororitas when the Inquisitor gave his order.

"Cosette. Let's go." said the Inquisitor, his tone indicating that he was in no mood to be challenged. Hearing this, the power-armored woman sighed and instead closed the eyes of the Mechanicus corpse she trying to tend to. She stood slowly and cast one last look at the Mechanicus corpses, a look Talia only saw in the eyes of the grieving. Then, she turned away, stone-faced, and walked to join the Inquisitor's servo-skull. Talia followed suit, her lasgun hanging lazily at her side.

Her ears perked as she registered the sound of armored boots trudging upon the marble floor. Looking to the source, she found the astartes glancing at one of the pillars intently.

The Slayer knew something wasn't right when he first took his step into the desolate wasteland before him.

"Do you sense it, Slayer?" Hayden questioned.

He sensed it alright. That oppressive and domineering aura that etched itself into the land, the trees, and the snow. That energy that had sustained a realm at the cost of others.

"Hell is here. Or not. We will only find out if we head into the temple. Get to it."

He stared at the pillar and then at the red inscription that was most prominent. It was the Symbol of the Beast. His symbol.

"This temple is of Sentinel origin. And based from how prominently you feature in it, dedicated to you." observed Hayden, amusement present in his voice. The Slayer strode towards the pillar and ran a free hand over the stone. "I'm running a diagnostic scan of the temple complex. It seems that this is only the entrance. We need to catch up with the Inquisitor. They're trying to fiddle with the gate."

The Slayer turned and found the Imperials fiddling around at the end of the hall before the massive doorway that stood fifteen feet high. On the gate, the Slayer found the symbol of Argent D'Nur plastered at the center,

"That settles it then. We are in a Night Sentinel ruin and fortunately for you, it is a ruin built by those who hadn't shifted their allegiances to the Khan Maykr and Hell." surmised Hayden, his voice leaking his pleasure and amusement at the entire situation. "As pleasing as this is, you need to hurry and open that gate before those Imperials do any more undo damage." Hayden continued. Indeed, the Imperials were standing back as the men of the 212th began to prepare explosives of some kind before the gate.

At that, the Slayer strode forward to join the Imperials, his heavy steps echoing in the hall. For each step he took, the temple slowly came to life. Passing by the pillars, torches that hadn't been lit for centuries suddenly burst into bright-blue flame, providing the hall with light and warmth. The chandeliers at the ceiling also came to life as well, fully illuminating the hall.

The Imperials looked about in confusion and alarm. The Space Marine, Raguel, even brought out his plasma rifle in the anticipation of an attack but instead only found the Slayer patiently striding over towards his position.

"Is this your doing, Marine?" the Inquisitor asked from his servo skull. The Slayer ignored him as he strode past them and stood before the Sentinel Circle that would grant him access to the temple's confines. His armor began to glow blue as the temple registered him as one of the Sentinels and the great stone doors of the temple rumbled as they began to slowly open.

From behind him, he could hear whispers of amazement coming from the Imperials.

That was the last thing he heard from them however as he strode inside as soon as the gate was wide open.

+++

"Inquisitor. A word."

Inquisitor Adrian Tanner sat back on his chair, his eyes and ears seeing and hearing what his servo skull registered. Using his link with the skull, he turned towards the source of the request.

"What is it, Raguel?" asked Tanner. The Dark Angel was striding right next to his servo skull as they trudged through the temple's halls.

"This is a temple that was constructed since the days of the Dark Age of Technology, yes?" said the Marine. Tanner nodded at his question and made it known with the slight sway of his servo skull.

"This so-called Astartes that assisted the guardsmen is no space marine, that we are sure of. However, could it be that he is instead a warrior from the Dark Age of Technology?" the Dark Angel speculated, his eyes firmly set upon the man striding ahead of them. The Dark Angel then continued his speculation. "The guardsmen said that he arrived from some method of teleportation and he slaughtered heretics with ease. Now, we see him accessing this temple and going through it as if he was there when it was at its height."

It was a big surprise for Tanner when he saw the so-called Astartes for himself. As his servo skull left the Valkyrie transport, he expected to find a hulking Space Marine clad in the armor of his chapter to stare down at his servo skull. Instead, he found a man that barely reached Raguel's height clad in a power armor of sorts.

Tanner felt betrayed but he held his tongue and had also given Cosette and Raguel strict orders to be silent as well. Raguel was nothing short of enraged that the impostor would don the title reserved for the Emperor's finest but he gave his word as a Dark Angel that he would be silent. And as for Cosette, it wasn't as if she could talk anyway so there was no need for him to worry if she would start babbling.

He didn't them to antagonize the man not until he had proven his skill to them. As soon as the mission was complete, Tanner swore he would interrogate the man personally.

However, the more he saw of him, the less certain Tanner felt in that regard.

He saw the carnage the man left behind in his wake and saw the high morale of the 212th. Despite their losses, they never felt more ready to take on the Emperor's foes. If there was one thing Tanner was sure about was hope could never be faked.

After all, he once had the same eyes in a world far away. A world on fire and of angels reaching for the lost flock.

"FOR THOSE WE CHERISH!"

Tanner winced as the memory played in his mind. He shook his head to knock off his thoughts. Returning to the present, his gave his orders to the Marine.

"If he is indeed a warrior from the Dark Age of Technology, keep a close eye on him. I do not want this blessing to be lost, do you understand me Raguel?"

If this was truly the case then this was one of the greatest discoveries that the Imperium ever made. A living and breathing human from the Age of Technology would make even the most emotionally dead Techpriest salivate.

This fact was not lost on Raguel who nodded. "As you wish, Inquisitor."

Tanner thought that was then end of it but then Raguel later added. "I am still punching him in the face for daring to take the title of Astartes though."

As he was about to retort, the voice known as Samuel Hayden suddenly made his presence known once more.

"Be warned. I am reading a massive energy source at the end of this hall. I have no idea what it is but it would be in your best interest to be careful." declared the voice. At that announcement, the Imperials instinctively held their weapons closer, their fingers just a inch from the trigger.

+++

Arriving at the end of the hallway, the first thing that Talia registered was the sound of an engine.

It resembled the sound of a Leman Russ suffering a terrible breakdown.

The Slayer and the Imperials found the sound coming from another doorway. The Slayer acted first and stood before it. The door opened and revealed a chamber.

Talia took a step inside and saw what looked to be a command room. Terminals, data ports and even a holographic emitter in the center of the room. The Imperials spread out as they entered the premises, inspecting each nook and cranny. When the Slayer entered, the command room came to life and a light voice began to play from hidden speakers.

"WELCOME, SLAYER."

The Imperials turned towards the DOOM Slayer as he strode towards the biggest terminal in the room.

"What is this?" questioned the Inquisitor's servo skull as it neared the Slayer.

"A relic of a by-gone age. An age where humanity was at it's apex but had to contend with a enemy beyond mortal understanding." answered Hayden.

"It is Chaos?" Talia asked. There was no other force that she knew to be as malevolent and destructive as Chaos. The answer that the voice gave her next sent a tingle up her spine.

"No. Something far worse."

On his chair, Tanner felt himself twitch.

The Slayer halted before the terminal. With a flick of his hand, the terminals sputtered and beeped as holograms appeared. Talia and some of her guardsmen watched with awed eyes as the Slayer maneuvered through the holograms with ease. With their lives devoted to the battlefield and with them never having seen Sentinel technology before, the Cadian 212th found it absolutely fascinating.

"Ah. That's better. I'm going over the system now." Hayden announced, his voice echoing in the room.

"Are you a Machine Spirit, Samuel Hayden?" Talia asked curiously with the same tone a child might ask an elder on what something was.

"Didn't you already ask this question, Lieutenant?" retorted the scientist. All eyes in the room fell upon her and Talia found her cheeks reddening at the attention.

"Well I-" she stammered but the robotic scientist interrupted her.

"For the benefit of others, I'll answer this question again." Hayden sighed. "My name is Dr. Samuel Hayden. I am an associate of the man you call Astartes. When I was alive, I was a scientist but terminal illness forced me to upload my consciousness into a metal body. That body no longer exists however as it is lost and cannot be recovered by any means. Any further questions?"

Raguel made a move to ask his own question but the Inquisitor's servo skull went before him.

"Ask your questions when we are done here." roughed out Tanner. The marine backed down albeit hesitatingly.

Seeing this, Hayden harrumphed in approval. "Excellent. I'm running through the temple's system now."

+++

"So...what music do you listen to?"

Krieger Male Model 69b #1812 stared at the brown-haired and cheery face of the Cadian woman seated right next to him in their little foxhole. 1812 had been busy digging up a foxhole when the woman came around and offered to help him dig it. 1812 made gestures that indicated he didn't need any help but the woman completely misinterpreted it and thought he said yes.

It was now there he found himself with a new foxhole mate and a chatty one at that.

1812 sighed inside his gasmask and scribbled into his notepad. As soon as he finished, he handed it to the Cadian. She read it for a few minutes then exploded in joy as she lightly elbowed him.

"You like Linkin Slayer? That's my favourite band too! Oh my Emperor, did you know that I listened to their..."

A pair of his fellow Kriegers marched past his foxhole. Seeing salvation, he gestured them to rescue him from his chatty partner but the men shook their heads, gesturing at their watches, and marched on.

"...and I totally relate to it! How about you?" beamed the woman, clearly expecting an answer. 1812 hadn't caught on what she had been saying but nevertheless nodded.

The woman beamed.

"You know what? I like you. You're going to be my friend!" she all but declared. Behind his mask, 1812 groaned silently. Looking into the snow-filled sky, he made a plea to the Emperor to rescue him from his newfound friend.

In the corner of the field, the bodies had been neatly piled in preparation for a cremation.

It was also at that moment, one of the bodies began to twitch.

+++

"I have completed my scans." breathed Hayden, excitement in his voice. "And they are fascinating."

"How come?" Raguel asked in his usual grim verb. Sister Cosette, having grown bored of doing nothing, had taken a female guardsman into the corner and summarily began to braid her hair, much to the guardsman's errant confusion.

She tried to get the Inquisitor's servo skull to entertain her but the Inquisitor rebuffed her on the point that they were still in the middle of a Emperor damned mission. To emphasize that point, he directed his servo skull to go even closer towards the slayer to have a look at the data that was processing on the terminal.

"According to this temple's log, they were transported from their...time through unknown but powerful means. The denizens of this temple had entombed themselves after a great defeat and chose to conserve their strength to fight another day rather than striking out in vengeance." explained the scientist.

Hearing that, Tanner could not help but think of the Necrons who also slept to conserve their strength and rise another day to fight.

"Who sleeps here, Lord Hayden?" Raguel asked once more.

"The Night Sentinels," replied the scientist.

As Tanner moved to ask on who they were, the sounds of shrieking in the hallways turned them away from the terminal. The Imperials turned towards the hallway, weapons raised as instincts screamed at them to prepare.

"What in the Emperor's name is that?" a guardsman asked aloud, voice quivering as he clutched his lasgun.

"Imperial Guard! Form up!" Talia ordered immediately, sensing danger coming from the hallways. Her guardsmen gave silent affirmatives and immediately took positions behind what cover was available in the room.

"What is this new devilry, Hayden?" Tanner asked as he turned his servo skull back to the terminal.

Inside his office, Tanner's spine chilled when the scientist gave him an answer.

"Hell."

+++

A/N: And here's the serious update. Still not apologizing for the April Fool's chapter :D


KNEE-DEEP 
IN THE DEAD 


ANovel by Dafydd ab Hugh 
and Brad Linaweaver 
Based on Doom from id Software 


Le’ 


POCKET STAR BOOKS 
New York London Toronto Sydney 


Dedicated with lust to Camille Paglia, who smokes the same cigars as Fred 
Olen Ray 


Before the Beginning 


Kefiristan is about as close as you can come to hell on Earth. 

I say that with authority: I’ve spent the last eighteen months doing a tour 
here, trying to keep the Kefiri People’s Liberation Army, who call 
themselves the “Scythe of Glory,’ from the throats of the rightist 
Khorastisti, who have the backing of Azeri transplants from the south (who 
want to keep their enclaves), who are fighting a “dirty war’ against 
Communist Cuban and Peruvian meres . . . Jeez, you get the picture. It’s a 
snarled skein of a million bloody threads up here on the top of the world, in 
the northern extension of the Karakoram range, between Afghanistan and 
Samarkand, Uzbekistan. 

We’d just punched through the craggy pass pleasantly known as the “torn 
hymen” in the local tongue and come across the small, Muslim city of pik 
Nizganij, perched on a mountain peak of 2200 meters. 

I stared in horror. Even eighteen months of picking up after the Scythe of 
Glory and their Shining Path buddies didn’t prepare me for what was left of 
pik Nizganij. 

It was a Bosch canvas, severed limbs and hollowed-out trunks—eaten 
out by animals, I prayed—planted through the fields like stalks of corn, 
blood painting doors and walls like the first Passover . . . except it was 
human blood, not lamb’s blood. 

Corporal Flynn Taggart, Fox Company, 15th Light Drop Infantry 
Regiment, United States Marine Corps; 888-23-9912. Everyone calls me 
Fly, except when they’re pissed. 

Fox crept through the town, hell-shocked, trying without much success 
to count body parts and make a reasonable KIA guess. Fog or an evil cloud 
rolled across the mountaintop, shrouding the sprightly red decoration and 
muffling our footsteps. It was like we walked along a cotton corridor, 
tripping over gruesome reminders that war, especially the virulent hatred of 


one tribe for another, throws men back into pre-bronze, pre-agricultural 
savagery. I wondered how many victims were killed by the victors’ bare 
hands. 

Something moved in the mist. 

A shadow, a shape; nothing more. Gunnery Sergeant Goforth froze us 
with a slight hiss . . . Fox is damn-well trained, even for the Light Drop. 

Gates stopped next to me; he touched my arm, silently pointing to left 
and right. I saw immediately; whatever the shapes were, they surrounded us 
from eight o’clock to four o’clock . . . we might be able to retreat, but we 
couldn’t flank. 

I watched the gunny; Arlene Sanders was whispering something in his 
ear. She was our scout, the lightest of the Light Drop. PFC Sanders could 
fade into the night so not even a werewolf could sniff her out. My best 
buddy. 

She might have been more; once, we had—no; we were buddies. We 
didn’t talk about that night. Anyway, she had Dodd, and I don’t separate 
bookends. 

Arlene backed away, backed past me, throwing me a wink as she 
vanished. She would swing in a wide arc, ease around behind the still- 
moving shades, and report back to the lieutenant and Gunny Goforth via a 
secured line. I’d find out soon enough. 

I hadn’t moved, and neither had the rest of us; I could barely hear Bill 
breathing next to me and couldn’t hear Dodd or Sheill at all. If we were 
lucky, maybe the dinks wouldn’t even know we were here; they’d just pad 
right on by. 

Then Lieutenant Beelzebub came running up, demanding, “What the hell 
is going on?” in his normal speaking voice, an irritating whine. 

The lieutenant’s name was Weems, actually. I just call him Beelzebub 
because he’s a fat, sweaty heathen always surrounded by a swarm of gnats. 
They like the taste of his perspiration. 

The dinks froze as suddenly as we had; no longer moving, they vanished 
into the swirling gray. We had just lost whatever surprise we had, lost our 
best chance to get out of this encounter without a shot fired . . . and all 
because a buffoon who had been a first lieutenant for three years now 
couldn’t figure out it was a Medusa drill! 


One of them moved; then another. They moved singly, here and there, 
and we no longer had a clue where the mass of them was. 

Weems began to panic; we’d all seen it before. “Aren’t we going to take 
them out?” he asked Goforth, who was frantically putting his finger to his 
lips. “Somebody should take them out.” 

Goforth put his hand to his ear; he was listening to Arlene’s report, 
trying to stifle the lieutenant with his other hand. 

But Weems saw a ghost to his left, a specter to his right. We were 
surrounded! In Weems’s mind—I use the term loosely—they were Indians, 
we were the 7th Cav, and he was Custer. 

“The lieutenant isn’t going to stand for this!” snapped the lieutenant. 
“Goforth, take out those soldiers!” 

The gunny broke his own drill. “Sir, we don’t even know who they 
are... Sanders says they’re wearing robes and hoods—” 

“Scythe of Glory!” said Weems, again raising his voice. 

“No sir, just robed men—” 

“Gunny, I gave you an order . . . now take down those men!” 

Arlene flashed past me again. “What the hell’s going on?” she hissed. 

“Weems wants us to take em down.” 

“Fly, they’re monks! You gotta stop the crazy son of a bitch!” 

I was the second-ranking noncom; Goforth would listen to me, I thought. 
I hunched over and jogged to the gunnery sergeant. “Gunny, Arlene says 
they’re monks.” 

“Taggart, right?” said Weems, as if bumping into me at an oyster- 
shucking party. 

“Sir, they’re just monks.” 

“Do you know that for sure? Does anyone know that for sure?” 

“Sanders said—” 

“Sanders said! Sanders said! Does Sanders have to deal with Colonel 
Brinkle every week?” 

“Sir,” began the gunny, “I think we should recon the group before we 
open fire.” 

Weems looked him in the face, shaking in fury. “As long as I’m giving 
the orders here, Marine, you’ ll obey them. Now take down those men!” 

Monks. Freakin’ monks! 


I snapped. Maybe it was the bodies, or the body parts. The mountain air, 
thin oxygen. A gutful of Weems, Arlene’s frightened, incredulous stare, the 
way Goforth’s jaw set and he turned to give the order—a twenty-year man, 
he wasn’t going to throw it away over a bunch of lousy religious dinks. 

But suddenly, it occurred to me that if Weems were lying facedown in 
the deep muddy, he wouldn’t be giving no orders. Then we could let the 
damned monks disappear, and nobody would be the loser. 

“Scuse me, sir,’ I said, tapping the looie on the shoulder. 

He turned, and I Georged him. Full-body swing; came out of Orlando, 
where I grew up. Picked up speed over Parris Island, hooked in at 
Kefiristan, and turned off the lights of Mr. Lieutenant Weems in pik 
Nizganjj. 

Alas, they only flickered. Power was restored. The dork didn’t have a 
glass jaw; have to give him that. 

Weems sprawled messily in the mud, and a couple of the boys were on 
me like monkeys on a tree. Weems flopped for a bit like a giant spider, then 
he found his hands and knees. He glared at me for a moment, an evil smile 
cracking his face. “Later,” he said. Then he turned back to Goforth. “That 
don’t mean crap, gunnery sergeant; now take down those men—or are you 
going to frag me, instead?” 

Goforth looked at me, looked at Weems, looked at the ground. Then he 
clicked his M-92 to rock ’n’ roll and quietly said, “Fox—take down those 
men.” 

I closed my eyes, listening to powder hiss, bullets crack, the metal clang 
of receivers slamming back and home. The screams of the dying. The 
shouts of the victors. I smelled the smoke from the smokeless power, the 
primer, fresh blood. 

I’m in hell, remember thinking; /’m in hell. 

We mopped up the enemy troops in record time. Strange thing; none of 
them shot back. Fact, no weapons were found . . . just fifty-three men 
ranging from preteen to seventy or eighty, wearing brown robes and hoods, 
shaved heads, a couple carrying prayer sticks. 

The boys wouldn’t get off my back. Weems wouldn’t even walk around 
where I could see him, the murdering bastard, while he formally charged 
me and I opted for a formal court-martial instead of Captain’s Mast. 


Jesus and Mary, somebody should put a bullet in his brain. I could taste 
the trigger. I didn’t know how I was ever going to be shriven if I couldn’t 
feel remorse. 


1 


I didn’t miss Earth, but I sure as hell hated Mars. Sitting in a dingy 
mess hall on Phobos, one of the two, tiny Martian moons, seemed like a 
nice compromise. 

Ordinarily, the C.O., Major Boyd, would have handed me over to the 
jaggies for trial; but the day after Weems gave the fateful order that bought 
him a mouthful of fist from Yours Truly, the 15th received orders to answer 
a distress call from Phobos. Fox Company was due to rotate back to the 
world anyway; Boyd decided to mail us to Mars. 

They poured me onto the transport along with the rest of Fox; plenty of 
time to fry my butt after we figured out what the hell the UAC miners were 
squawking about this time. 

The Corps, the Corps, all glory to the Corps! I don’t think you know 
what the Marine Corps truly means to me. It has a bit to do with my father; 
no, he was not a Marine, God no. Maybe something to do with growing up 
in Orlando, Florida, and Los Angeles, seeing first the ersatz “Hollywood 
Boulevard” of Universal Studios East, then the even phonier real thing out 
west. Glitter and tinsel . . . but what was real? 

Everything in my life rang as hollow as the boulevard until I found my 
core in the Corps. 

Honor wasn’t just something you did to credit cards. A lie wasn’t called 
spin control, and spin was something you only put on a cue ball. Yeah, 
right, you think you know more about it than I? I know it was all BS, even 
in the Corps. I know the service was riddled up and down with lying sacks 
of dung, like everything else. “There is no cause so noble it will not attract 
fuggheads;” one of those sci-fi writers Arlene is always shoving at me, 
David Niven or something. 

But God damn it, at least we say the word honor without laughing. At 
least we have a code—‘I will not lie, cheat, or steal, nor tolerate those 


among us who do”—even if individuals don’t always live up to it. At least 
it’s there to reach for, even if our grasp falls far short. At least decency has a 
legal definition, right there in the Universal Code of Military Justice! At 
least respect means more than leaving the other guy’s graffiti alone. At least 
we do more crap by six AM. than most of you civilians do all day. At least 
the Corps is the Corps, semper fidelis—damn it, we know who we are and 
why we are! Do you? 

Arlene never saw it the way I did; hell, no one did. I was a majority of 
one. 

But you can’t understand me unless you understand this much: there is a 
place in the world where decent men walk the streets, where water flows 
uphill, where miracles happen behind enemy lines and without air support, 
and where a guy (boy or girl) will stand on the wall that divides you people 
from the barbarians at the gate, take a bullet, and shoot back at the son of a 
bitch what fired it. 

Unless you’ve been there, you’ll never know. I want to take you there. 

The long trip to Mars was dull, and the little voice in the back of my 
head had plenty of time to ask whether I would do anything different if 
given the chance. I had to honestly answer no. 

Funny thing is, I always hoped I’d go to space one day . . . but not like 
this. My idea was to be on a deep-space exploratory ship, pushing out 
beyond the bounds of the known solar system. But when I scored only a 60 
on the MilSpaceAp test, the chances of me receiving a deep-space 
assignment ranged somewhere between infinitesimal and “forget it.’ The 
big surprise was that one right upper cut to the concrete jaw of Lieutenant 
Weems opened my pathway to the stars. 

Not only would I do it over again, I'd still enjoy it! 

I stared at the two men whose job was to guard me, and had a strange 
feeling of unreality. “Want some coffee?” one of them asked with 
something that sounded like actual concern. His thin face reminded me of 
one of the monks. 

“Yeah,” I said. “Black, if you don’t mind.” He smiled. We’d run out of 
cream back in Kefiristan, and when he hopped up to Phobos, the supply 
situation was no improvement. 

The guard’s name was Ron. The other guard’s name was Ron, too—I 
called him “Ron Two,’ but they didn’t see the humor in it. 


We didn’t talk much. It seemed a little insulting only having two Marines 
protecting such a dangerous type as Yours Truly; but the other men were 
busy figuring out what had gone wrong on Phobos. 

After we up-shipped to Mars Base, we sat for a solid day, trying to find 
out why the UAC miners on Phobos had sent a distress call—and why they 
didn’t answer now. In the Marines, you spend eternity so bored you’d look 
forward to your own court-martial as a break in the tedium. Then an 
unexpected danger with huge, jagged edges comes rolling over all the set 
routines, a reminder that the universe is a dangerous place. 

The last message we received from Phobos was: “Things coming 
through the Gate.’ When something that serious hits the fan, boredom is 
returned to its proper place as a luxury. The court-martial of a corporal was 
deemed less important than a potential threat to Mars—and not important at 
all compared to an immediate threat to the profits of the Union Aerospace 
Corporation. 

With a ringing cry of “sounds like they’re smoking something up there,” 
Lieutenant Weems boldly led his men into the transport. At first I thought 
I’d be left behind on Mars Base; but either Weems thought I might prove 
useful to have along, or else he just didn’t want a loose end. I volunteered to 
go along. Sometimes I’m not very bright. 

Major Boyd did his best to brief us by video feed, under the obvious 
handicap of complete ignorance. He made the best of it. We were issued 
pressure suits, in case we had to leave the immediate vicinity of the Gate. 
You couldn’t stay very long outside the pressure zone, and you’d get mighty 
cold, mighty fast. But at least the suits gave you a fighting chance to get toa 
ship or a zone before you were sucking vacuum. I was pleased to be issued 
a suit; I was less pleased that Weems didn’t issue me a weapon. 

While I contemplated the lethal uses of common household articles, PFC 
Ron Two brought the promised cup of coffee. It tasted bad enough to be a 
strategic weapon of deterrence. The expression on the guard suggested that 
he might have sampled it before passing it on to me; but maybe he was just 
plain scared of the situation. I couldn’t really blame him. 

A word about these Gates on Phobos and Deimos, the two tiny moons of 
Mars; you’ve probably heard about the Gates, even though officially it’s a 
secret. 


They were here when we first landed on Mars. It was a hell of a shock, 
discovering that someone or some thing had beaten us by a million years to 
our own closest neighbor! It was long before I joined up, of course, but I 
can only imagine the panic at the Pentagon when we found ancient and 
wholly artificial structures on Phobos, despite the complete lack of any 
form of life on Mars. 

It was pretty clear they’d been placed there by some alien intelligence. 
But what? All my adult life, ’d heard speculation: all the usual UFO 
culprits . . . Reticulans, Men-in-Black, ancient Martians—that was the most 
popular theory, despite not working at all: there was no native life on Mars; 
but try to tell that to generations raised on Martian Walkabout, Ratgash of 
Mars, and Mars, Arise! 

Me, I figured it was a race of alien anthropologists; they got here, said, 
“Hm, not quite ready yet,’ and left a “helipad” in case they decided to 
return... which they might do tomorrow or a hundred thousand years from 
now. 

Somebody decided to call them “Gates,” even though they just sat there 
doing nothing for as long as we’ve known about them. But surrounding 
them was a zone of about half Earth-normal gravitation . . . on a moon 
whose normal gravity is just this side of zero! In addition to the big, inert 
Gates, there were also small pads scattered here and there that instantly 
transported a person from point A to point B within the area, evidently 
without harm . . . teleports, if you will. I had heard about them but never 
seen one; damned if you’d ever get me into one, either. 

When the United Aerospace Corporation bribed enough congressmen for 
the exclusive contract to mine Phobos and Deimos, they built their facilities 
around the Gates, taking advantage of the artificial gravity . . . except for 
those parts of the operation that wanted low gravity, which they built 
outside the “pressure zones.” After the big reorganization, the Corps got the 
task of guarding the Gates. 

Well—it looked as though the big Gates weren’t quite so inert as we all 
thought. 

Once we landed on Phobos, the gunny dropped me and my two guards at 
the abandoned Air Base depot (in the “western” pressure zone— 
antispinwards) and took the rest of Fox Company on to the UAC facilities, 


Weems in tow, to reestablish contact and “secure the situation.” All my 
friends went with Weems, leaving me with the two Rons for company. 

The Phobos facility is built like a gigantic, underground cone extending 
many hundreds of meters into the rock. There are a bunch of levels, I’m not 
even sure how many. Eight? Nine? The whole thing is built in the center of 
the solar system’s largest strip mine, which would be terrible for the Phobos 
ecology—except that Phobos doesn’t have an ecology, of course; it’s an 
airless moon of ice and rock. 

The facility was on the opposite hemisphere from the base. Big deal. . . 
the entire moon is only about twenty-five kilometers in diameter. You can 
walk from one pole to the other, except most of it is disturbingly close to 
zero-g, outside the pressure zones. 

We had the radio on in the mess hall and were periodically picking up 
messages from Weems’s Weasels. We’d about given up hope of hearing 
anything from the UAC guys who used to be on Phobos. As I sipped the 
scalding wake-up-call, wondering who I could sue if I burned my tongue, I 
couldn’t help but scrutinize the two Rons. Neither gave the impression of 
being on top of the situation. They kept glancing at the closed cafeteria 
doors, at the radio, at each other . . . They weren’t paying much attention to 
their prisoner. 

They were also having the same conversation every twenty minutes or 
so. It generally started like this: “What do you think’s happening?” one 
would ask the other. 

I was tired of listening to variations on I-don’t-know, so I volunteered a 
theory: “Somehow the Gates turned on, and whoever built them decided the 
UAC was trespassing. Maybe they were wiped out.” 

“But who attacked us?” asked Ron One. Funny; I never thought of Union 
Aerospace as part of “us.” 

“They said monsters were coming through the Gate,’ said Ron Two with 
the same sense of surprise he’d displayed the other half-dozen times. 

“They said ‘things,’” I corrected. Neither heard me. Things or monsters, 
I had faith in Arlene and the rest of the guys. 

The guards didn’t strike me as being overly interested in the subject of 
high order physics. They had reached firm conclusions in the realm of the 
biological sciences, however. They didn’t believe in monsters. 

The truth is that neither did I. 


In one respect I was as bad as the PFCs. There were questions that 
couldn’t be answered yet, but they wouldn’t stay out of my mind. Who was 
the enemy? How had they reached Phobos through the gateways? And most 
troubling of all, why hadn’t Fox found any bodies yet? Major Boyd and 
even Colonel Brinkle back on Earth would want answers to these questions 
and a lot more. 

Suddenly, the radio sputtered to life, grabbing our attention, an invisible 
hand reaching out to choke the breath from us. It was PFC Grayson, out 
front on recon, reporting to Weems, who was elsewhere in the facility. The 
young Marine had found a corpse. Weems radioed back the obvious 
instructions. 

“ID impossible, sir,’ reported Grayson, his voice tense. “It’s in too many 
pieces. I can positively say that it was a white male. It looks like—Jesus, sir, 
it looks like claw marks. And this body’s been chewed.” 

Wild beasts on airless Phobos? Judging by the sickened expressions from 
Ron and Ron, it was all too evident that neither of these specimens had ever 
seen combat. I’ve seen my share . . . and all at once, the idea of living long 
enough to attend my own court-martial seemed very appealing. Even five 
years at Leavenworth looked good. The fact that I didn’t have a gun crawled 
around deep inside my gut like a tapeworm. Right then I decided to remedy 
the situation. 

The masticated body parts had been found in the processing plant. We 
heard Weems over the radio issuing orders to converge on that point when a 
burst of static interfered with the reception. 

When Grayson’s voice came in again, it was loud and clear. Up until that 
moment, the universe still made some kind of sense to me. Of all the 
military scenarios running through my mind, none prepared me for what 
happened next: “Jesus Christ! It’s not human,’ shouted Grayson. “Too 
big ... shaped all wrong ... humanoid... red eyes...” 

While Grayson was providing this fragmentary report, he punctuated his 
description with bursts from his rifle. Before he could become more 
coherent, we heard an inarticulate roar of animal pain from whatever he was 
shooting, and then he shouted, “I can’t put it down!” The next scream we 
heard was fully human. 

My whole body went cold. Jesus—Arlene was down there. 

Keep cool, keep your head—she’s a Marine, damn it! 


One of the Rons looked like he was about to throw up. “Okay,” I said, 
“this has gone on long enough. We know we’re in this together. Give me a 
gun and let’s make some plans.” If Arlene were being shot at, God damn it, 
I intended to shoot back! The honor of the Corps was at stake, not to 
mention my best buddy’s life. 

The radio was reduced to background noise for the moment as Weems 
the Weasel tried to control the situation. The nervous looks exchanged 
between the dynamic duo in the mess hall made me wonder about training 
that completely destroys initiative. On the brink of death, all the Rons cared 
about was going by the book—even if that book printed their own obituaries 
in flaming letters. 

One finally generated the initiative to say, “We can’t give you a 
weapon!” 

I tried again. “Staying alive is the objective here. We’ve all got buddies 
down there. They don’t court-martial the dead! You can’t help anyone or 
defend anything if you’re dead. Now give me a piece!” 

If either of them had shown a glimmer of intelligence or guts, I wouldn’t 
have taken the next step. But they insisted on being idiots. 

Jesus Christ! As the Godfather said, there are men who go through life 
begging to be killed. 


2 


Shut up,” said the first Ron. 

“You're going back to detention,” said the other. This was a truly pathetic 
spectacle. Suddenly, I had become the threat in their eyes, simply because I 
was forcing them to face an unpleasant situation head-on. 

A number of things happened at once: more screams and gunfire came 
over the radio, and J thought I heard a woman scream. The nearest Ron 
unholstered his 10mm pistol and pointed it at me—then the poor jerk 
gestured the direction he wanted me to walk. He gestured with the hand 
holding the pistol. With an invitation like that what could I do? 

I caught his arm, moved the gun aside, and rabbit-punched him in the 
kidneys; the gun slid across the floor. The other Ron was still fumbling with 
his holster, so I turned and jabbed him in the throat . . . not hard enough to 
kill, but with enough impact to keep him busy trying to breathe. 

Sorry, Rons; Arlene PFC Sanders means more than the both of you 
rolled together! 

I turned back to the first one, who surprised me by regaining his feet and 
making a grab with his good arm. Too bad for him, he was off balance and 
fell toward me, providing another irresistible target. I flat-palmed the back 
of his head, and he was out like a light. The other Ron was still doubled 
over, trying to breathe as I collected their weapons. 

“You guys aren’t exactly cut out for Light Drop Infantry,’ I said in as 
kindly a voice as I could muster. 

Now I had a problem. They weren’t bad guys, but I couldn’t trust their 
goodwill not to come after me. Their fear might be enough to keep them out 
of my hair, but I couldn’t count on that, either. Nor did I want to leave them 
sitting ducks for the hostile forces that were loose in this station. So I 
helped the one who was still conscious to his feet and waited for his glazed 
eyes to clear a bit. 


“Listen, Ron; we’ve got a situation here. So far as I can tell, we only 
have these two sidearms between the three of us. This is not good. The 
lieutenant should have left us with some weapons, don’t you think?” It was 
a rhetorical question, so I kept on. “I’m leaving one of these guns with you, 
unloaded.” I let him sink back on the floor and slid the ammo clip across the 
floor. “When you feel well enough to reload, I suggest you barricade the 
door better than I can lock it from the outside, and wait for orders.” 

He looked sick as a dog but nodded, and I left him to his own devices. I 
pocketed the remaining ammo clips. I wanted all the edge a few extra 
rounds could provide until I could find an armory and lay my hands on 
some real firepower, if the factory had any. 

As I locked the mess hall doors behind me, I heard the radio sending out 
useless static crackle; no Weems, no Goforth—no Arlene. Well, last I heard, 
we were all going to have a party, with Grayson’s remains as the Guest of 
Honor. I didn’t like that particular train of thought so I derailed it. Time to 
get serious. 

After ten minutes of humping around the compound, I found a landcart 
—the last one. That was thoughtful of them. Phobos is so small, a diameter 
of only twenty-two kilometers, that I almost could hoof it to the factory .. . 
particularly in the ultra-low gravity. But I might need to evac the survivors; 
and in any case, speed counts. 

Although I’m not claustrophobic, I’d lately had my fill of blank walls. 
The spaceship was the worst. Traveling through a million miles of nothing 
in a little cubicle just so you can reach another cubicle at the end is not my 
idea of the conquest of space. 

At least for the one day we spent on Mars, we had a view. The domes 
were made of super-thick, insulated plastic, but were cleverly designed to 
give the illusion of being thin as a soap bubble. The only trouble was that 
the view wasn’t very impressive—a blank expanse of empty desert broken 
by an equally barren, dark purple sky. I was only so thrilled with looking at 
stars. I liked something bigger up there. Although we could see Phobos 
from Mars base camp, it was so tiny it almost looked like a bright star 
trucking across the sky. Not enough moon for a melancholy mood. 

But now as I crawled the land-cart out under the black, airless sky of 
Phobos, I enjoyed my first genuine feeling of freedom since I left Earth. 
Mars loomed in the sky, three-quarters full, larger than any moon and 


burning red as all the blood of all the armies ever spilled in uncountable 
battles across the stupid, drooling face of eternity—the face of a monster. 

By contrast, the gray, dull surface of Phobos looked like brittle, laundry 
soap or dried oatmeal; the only variation was Stickney, the huge crater that 
covered a quarter of the moon’s surface and filled the rest with impact 
striations. 

At that moment I thought that Mars might be the last beautiful sight I 
would ever experience. Ahead lay nothing good. The thought that I might 
shortly die didn’t bother me nearly so much as the dread of letting down my 
loved ones . . . again. 

There weren’t that many back on Earth, but there was one here on 
Phobos that meant everything to me. 

Maybe I did love her, I couldn’t say. I mean that literally . . . I couldn’t 
say it with her hooked up with Wilhelm Dodd, the dirty bastard. But that 
didn’t mean crap; if Arlene were in trouble, then putting my life on the line 
was the easiest choice I’d ever made. Doing my duty didn’t mean I had a 
death wish; it meant that I would have to stay alive as long as possible to 
find her and hump her out. All right, and the rest of Fox, too. 

So with Mars looming gigantic and our sun a shrunken, distant ball of 
flame, quickly setting as I crawled toward the factory, I sped through 
Phobos daylight, across the terminator, and into the black night. 

My stomach started roiling the moment I left the zone and entered the 
correct gravitational field of Phobos—not quite zero-g, but close enough for 
a queasy stomach. I had to watch my speed carefully here; I wasn’t sure 
what the escape velocity from Phobos was . . . probably a lot more than a 
crawling land-cart could make. But I sure as hell didn’t want to end up in 
orbit—the tractor treads didn’t work too well out there! 

I wished I could drive the land-cart right inside the refinery, but I had to 
leave it in the garage on the surface. It sure felt good to get back under even 
the half-normal gravity in the refinery zone. The silent station lurked below 
the surface, containing what was left of Fox Company. 

As I began the long descent, I promised to keep very, very quiet. Early in 
a career in the Light Drop Infantry, you learn the absolute essential of lying 
to yourself. Sure enough, there was noise, and I was the source of it. Even 
in the low-g, my boots squeaked slightly. Each squeak was magnified in my 


imagination as if giant rodents nibbled at my heels. The rectangle of light 
beneath me grew in size as there was no turning back. 

I thought about using the lift, but there was no telling who Id find inside. 
The access-tube ladder looked a safer bet. 

A popular feature of these permanent stations is how there’s always light 
and air so long as the small reactor is working. Imagine my disappointment 
on climbing down the ladder into the hangar when I noticed the first signs 
that something was seriously wrong: the lights were flickering, and I didn’t 
hear the whine of the air recirculators. 

The light was adequate to show empty corridor stretching in front and 
behind me. This section didn’t seem to show any signs of recent conflict. . . 
and no sooner did a small part of me make the mistake of relaxing than I 
heard a sharp hissing sound. Before I had time to think, the 10mm was in 
my hand and I had spun around into a defensive crouch. I’m sure I scared 
the leaky pipe real bad. At times like this, nothing is more welcome than an 
anti-climax. 

As I examined the damaged pipe, mindful not to be scalded by the 
escaping steam, I realized that I might have found something interesting 
after all. The pipe had been dented by a blunt metal object of some kind, 
and there was a rusty stain on the floor underneath it. 

There was really only one direction to go, so I went. That direction 
would also take me toward the hangar control room, where I could swear I 
heard low, growling noises. Somehow I didn’t feel like reholstering my gun. 
I didn’t like the way my palm was sweating, either. 

Taking it nice and easy, I proceeded down the corridor. I had a good, 
long view ahead of me. No room for surprises. I didn’t hear the animalistic 
noises again, but that didn’t make me feel any better. Finally, I reached the 
control room. Right before I pushed the door open I felt a sudden shiver on 
the back of my neck and spun around, trying to look down both directions 
at once, like one of those crazy cartoon drawings of a double take. But there 
was nothing. At least nothing I could see. No casualties yet, thank God. 

The control room was empty, but it had a peculiar odor like sour lemons. 
After months in a barracks, whether in Kefiristan, on Mars, or in space, you 
get used to the smell of paint and gallons of disinfectant. But this was 
nothing like that. I didn’t like it one bit. 


It took only a few minutes to establish that all the equipment was in 
working order—except for the communications system, which was smashed 
into nonexistence. Then I had a brainstorm. There might be a gun locker 
here, something left over from when Phobos was an Air Force outpost; 
something a bit heavier than a 10mm pistol would greatly improve the 
adjustment to my new environment. 

I found the locker and jimmied open the door fairly quietly; but there 
were no weapons. Bare cupboard. Not even a slingshot. But so it shouldn’t 
be a total waste, there was a nice selection of last year’s flak jackets; not 
combat armor, but better than skin and a pressure suit. One looked like it fit 
me, so I put it on. 

There seemed nothing else to do but resume my journey along the 
corridor that must ultimately take me into the rest of the station. I was 
reaching that dangerous psychological state when you feel that you are the 
only living person in what had been a battlefield situation. Another word for 
it is carelessness. 

Reconnoiter, you bastard! My little voice was telling me to get back with 
the program. And not a moment too soon. A human figure came striding 
purposefully in my direction from just around the curve of the corridor. 

I almost shot first, and asked questions at some undetermined future 
date. Reminding myself that Arlene and my buddies were here, as well as 
UAC civilians, I relaxed the old trigger finger that crucial centimeter. But I 
kept the gun on the human shape and experienced a sickening moment, not 
of empathy, but of reluctant understanding of Lieutenant Weems and the 
monks. 

When the fearsnake slithers around inside your gut, it’s pretty damned 
easy to just start squeezing off at anything that moves. 

Then I recognized the shape as one Corporal William Gates. 

“Bill!” I shouted, relief flooding me at contact with a fellow Light Drop. 
“What the hell’s going on? Are you all right? Where’s Arlene—the rest of 
Fox?” 

At no moment was there any doubt that this person approaching was the 
corporal with whom I’d played poker, drank, and told nasty jokes. We’d 
been through enough together that I didn’t even mind that he was one of the 
monkeys who jumped on my back when I popped Weems. Bill had a very 


distinctive face with eyes spaced wide apart and a scar that ran from his 
prominent chin into his lower lip. 

He was walking in an erratic manner; fatigue, I assumed. Men in combat 
situations can get very weird, and I’d seen plenty worse than this. 

Battle fatigue might even have explained the strange words coming out 
of his mouth, stuff that sounded like an old horror movie. Bill was staring 
straight ahead; but he didn’t seem to recognize me as he chanted, “The Gate 
—the Gate is the key—the key is the Gate.” I didn’t like the spittle on his 
chin, either. 

As much as I wanted to run over to him, I held back. There was 
something really wrong here, nothing I could put my finger on yet, but it 
was like that smell in the control room—little hints that something was 
FUBARed on Phobos. 

“Bill,” I tried again. “Bill, it’s your cuz, Fly.” 

This time he noticed me. I could tell because he grinned the most evil 
grin I’ve ever seen in my life. 

Then he raised his rifle and opened fire! 

Even then, I didn’t want to believe what was happening. Fortunately, my 
bodily reflexes were more realistic. Diving behind a pillar, I was already 
preparing to return fire. 

I had to try one more time. “Stop firing, Bill! It’s Fly, goddamn it. Stop 
shooting!” 


3 


Bill didn’t stop; he came closer. Desperate, feeling like Cain, I 
returned fire. Given the half-dead condition Bill was in, killing him all the 
way should have been easy. The first bullet took him in the throat, above his 
kevlar armor. That should have done the job, but he kept on coming. I 
pumped more rounds at Bill, and finally one connected with his head. That 
dropped him. 

But even as brains and blood oozed onto the corridor floor, his body 
continued to flop around the way a chicken does when its head has been 
removed. Humans don’t do that . . . and they don’t have a sour-lemon smell 
either, which was suddenly so overpowering that I could barely breathe. 

I stared, shaking like a California earthquake. 

I was looking—at—a zombie. 

That was all that kept racing through my head, screaming the word over 
and over again between my ears . . . zombie, zombie, zombie! What utter 
shit. Maybe Arlene could believe in all that crap and bullroar; she watched 
those damned, damned horror movies all the—I wasn’t never going to 
watch anything like .. . a freakin’ zombie? I was crazy, buggin’, freaked 
like some hippie punk snot flying on belladonna. 

There are no goddamned zombies! This is the real world, this is—” 

Gates flopped some more, then stiffened up so quick, it was like he’d 
been dead for hours. Scared, but drawn toward him like iron filings to a 
magnet, I crept forward and touched his corpse. 

Billy Boy was ice-cold. This meat was decidedly not fresh. 

I gagged, then turned aside and vomited. He was blue. His skin was 
tough, like leather. 

Private Gates was a freaking zombie. Walking dead. They’d killed him, 
then sucked the life out of his body, so that in just half an hour, he was 
many days dead. 


Arlene... ! 

I knew what I had to do next. I was crying while I did it. I hoped I’d find 
some magazines to go with my new acquisition, a 10mm, M-211 
Semiautomatic Gas-Operated Infantry Combat Weapon (Sig-Cow, we 
called it). Bitch of a way to get one. 

Gates only had a single spare mag, and the one in the rifle was dead. Still 
shaking, I reloaded the rifle, dropping rounds left and right, and crept on, 
wondering who would come running at the sound of me murdering my dead 
chum. 

Leaving Gates’s body, I started walking fast, then a little faster. Suddenly 
I was running . . . not in fear, but sick rage. The little voice in my head that 
usually keeps me on track was screaming about discipline and strategy and 
keeping my cool. The voice wanted me to make a nice, practical analysis of 
the evidence. 

I had every intention of listening to reason, but my feet and brain stem 
had other ideas. They were running from the face of a man who used to be a 
human being; running toward the bastards who reworked him. 

I’ve always had good survival instincts. They’d never abandoned me 
before, not even in the worst firefights in a career that had seen its fair share 
of combat. But here and now, in a dull, gray cavern under the craggy 
surface of Phobos, my body was betraying me. If I could just stop seeing 
the slack jaw, the dead eyes, I could get control again. But the face wouldn’t 
go away; even the characteristic twitch of the right eye that used to annoy 
me when Gates was alive unnerved the hell out of me now. I couldn’t stand 
to be winked at by a zombie. 

Yeah. Zombie. Putting the word to it helped. At least I was running a 
little slower and started paying attention to my surroundings. I saw the walls 
of the corridor instead of a phantom mask of death; and I heard the loud 
echoing of my footsteps, my labored breathing . . . and the shuffling noises 
of other feet. 

Four of them were waiting for me around the bend—four zombies. They 
stared at me with dead, dry eyes .. . and one of the zombies was a woman. 

I didn’t know her; UAC worker. Thank God it wasn’t Arlene. I didn’t 
even want to think about Arlene with gray flesh and a sour-lemon smell, 
sneering and pumping bullets at me without any recognition. 


I felt a rage I'd never felt before; my blood was on fire and my skin 
couldn’t contain the boiling, liquid anger. I shook from hate so deep that 
military training could never reach it. 

I didn’t want to shoot these travesties of human life. I wanted to rip them 
apart with my bare hands! They shuffled toward me, fumbling their 
weapons and pumping shots like their rifles would never run dry. What did I 
do? I staggered directly toward them, raising my own M-211 and taking one 
of the walking dead in its shoulder . . . a useless shot. 

It was the girl that broke the spell. Some little piece of who she once was 
must have been left in her brain, a faint echo or resonance of human 
thought. She didn’t charge blindly like the other three; she turned and fell 
behind cover to plink at me. 

My higher brain functions kicked in. I shook my head, then strafed while 
sidestepping to a pillar; once behind cover, I aimed a shot into Zombie 
One’s head. It roared, then danced like a headless chicken and collapsed. I 
got the message: only head shots got me any points. Just like in the movies. 

The citrus stench almost overwhelmed me. I snuck a quick glance at the 
zombie I’d just smoked . . . something squirmed inside its brain. 
Swallowing nausea, I took a bead on Zombie Two. 

The zombie-girl chittered, and the other two headed jerkily toward the 
console behind which she crouched. I caught Zombie Two before it made it 
halfway; but the other one took a position behind cover, and both it and 
Zombie Girl returned fire. 

A standoff. I was trapped behind the pillar, two zombies behind an 
instrument console marked UAC and covered with sticky-pad notes, the 
three of us separated by no more than twenty meters. Swiveling my head, I 
stared wildly around, trying to spot something useful. 

Five minutes deep into the Phobos facility, and I was pinned down inside 
a mortuary in hell. A dozen bodies sprawled on the floor from the open 
control room in which I stood all the way to a curve in the corridor beyond 
which I could see no farther. Recognizing a few of them didn’t do my 
stomach any good. The others were probably UAC workers. 

I thought I’d seen war in Kefiristan. 

The undead and I played a game of tag around the pillar; I popped out to 
fire off a shot, and they sprayed my position a moment after I abandoned it. 


There wasn’t much time to appreciate the fine details; the third time I 
popped around for a shot, I slipped on fresh blood. Even as a kid, I was 
good at turning mishaps into advantages; special training merely augmented 
my natural instinct for survival. 

I hit the floor on my knees, then dropped to my belly to aim a shot while 
braced against the floor. The third male zombie rose to fire down on me, and 
I caught it in the throat, knocking it backward; before it could reacquire its 
target, Yours Truly, my next shot took Zombie Three in the right eye. 

The female wasn’t wearing a uniform or armor; I realized she must have 
once been a UAC worker, not a soldier . . . which might account for her bad 
aim. She fired off a couple of rounds that missed by a wide margin. 

I can fight this war forever, | thought, rage starting to creep back. Then it 
struck me: I could fight this war forever, at least until I was finally blown 
away, and never even come close to figuring out what had happened here at 
Phobos Base. 

I had to take one of bastards “alive,” if that was the right word. 

The plan flickered through my head between one shot and the next; and 
now that I finally had a plan, I was Light Drop Infantry again! 

Quickly, before she could adjust and acquire me, I bolted around the 
pillar, head-faked to the left, then cut right and hopped over the console. 
Zombie Girl swiveled the wrong direction, and before she could turn back, I 
swung the butt of my Sig-Cow into her temple. 

She dropped like bricks on Jupiter. The rifle sailed from her hands across 
the floor. I slung my own M-211 across my back, flipped her over and 
shoved my pistol in her mouth. 

“What the hell’s going on?” I demanded. 

“Mmph hmmph rmmph,” she said. I pulled the gun out of her mouth, but 
she kept talking as if she had not even noticed it. “—is the key. Gate is the 
key. Key is the gate. Coming. Kill you all.” 

Zombie Girl’s eyes shifted left and mght; she was preternaturally 
strong ... but not as strong as big Fly Taggart. My hand drooped as I stared 
at her, and she snapped at it like a rabid dog, trying to bite me. 

Abruptly, I realized why the zombies’ eyes were so dry and their vision 
so bad: they never blinked. 

I pushed the pistol against her forehead. “If there’s any piece alive inside 
of you, you know what this thing will do to your shriveled, little brains. 


What the hell is coming through the gate?” 

“Great. Ones. Gate ones.” She focused her eyes on me, seeming to see 
me for the first time. She didn’t answer, but for a moment her face was 
filled with such torment that I could no longer stand the interrogation. 

I cocked the hammer; her eyes rolled up, looking over my head. “You 
want this?” I asked. 

Zombie Girl closed her eyes. It was the only kind of prayer left to her by 
the reworking that made her what she was. 

I closed my own eyes when I squeezed the trigger. The gunshot snapped 
me awake again; I jumped up, slid the Sig-Cow into ready position, and 
backed away from the undead dead. 

What the hell was going on? I started to think I had an answer . . . part of 
an answer. 

“Who built the Gates?” The question endlessly on everyone’s lips might 
be about to be answered. Maybe. But were the “Great Ones” coming 
through the Gates the ones who had built them? Or had the builders already 
been overrun by some even more powerful, horrific critter, who was now 
joyfully following Gate after Gate, finding and overpowering all the 
colonies of the builders’ “empire”? 

Neither thought was pleasant: humans were either trespassers who were 
about to be run off the property or dessert after a main course of Gate 
builders. 

I got the shakes, real bad. I backed into a dark corner, M-211 pointed 
toward the corridor, the unknown, the way I hadn’t been yet. I had not seen 
a particular body I'd half dreaded, half hoped to find. Christ. Arlene was 
still Somewhere Out There, one way or the other. 

I prayed she was lying dead on the deck, not stumbling toward me with 
dry, unblinking eyes and a sour-lemon smell. 

I might soon be the only living human on Phobos, I realized. I had little 
faith in the guards I’d left back in the mess hall. First contact with zombies, 
and they’d role over and, to coin a phrase, play dead. I could imagine a 
rotting corpse that used to be Lieutenant Weems telling them to get with the 
zombie program; the Rons would salute and “Yes sir!” themselves straight 
to hell. 

The old survival mechanism was definitely starting to kick in for Yours 
Truly. ’d never been completely comfortable as a team player. I could see 


myself doing the job of zombie exterminator until I was the only biped left 
standing on Phobos. These living dead characters weren’t very good 
soldiers. Yeah, I could dust them all. Except for one little detail. 

I couldn’t bear coming up against what used to be Arlene Sanders. No, 
that wasn’t very appealing at all. It’s not like she was my girl; she had her 
Dodd, and it seemed to satisfy her. Dodd and I didn’t really like each other, 
but we tolerated for Arlene’s sake. 

Not love, I swear. It’s just that Arlene lived in the same world I did, and I 
mean a lot more than just wearing the same uniform. She wasn’t like any 
other girl I’'d been . . . I mean, any other girl ’d known. 

Arlene remembered being awakened by a D.I. heaving a trash can down 
the hall, same as me. She remembered the jarhead getting all over her; “on 
your face, down-up-down-up-down-up—you keep pumpin’ ’em out until J 
get tired!”” She knew about reveille at 0500, PT (Physical Training), or a 
dainty, eight-mile run at 0505. 

Arlene knew the smell of disinfectant. She knew all about scraping two 
years of accumulated crud off a wall with a chisel so the next guy could slap 
on a quarter-inch-thick splash of anti-corrosion paint. 

She’d spent just as many months as I wrestling a goddamned floor buffer 
up and down a corridor, while already dog-sacked from hours of PT, 
obstacle course, combat training, small-arms, endless, mindless instruction 
on how to break down and reassemble a Sig-Cow while blindfolded, and 
lectures on the exotic venereal diseases of Kefiristan, Mars, Phobos Base, 
and Ohio . . . hours that always seemed to add up to twenty-six or twenty- 
eight per day. 

Arlene figured out a lot about me in record time. She was bright, and just 
as committed to a military career as any other man in the outfit. She’d 
become my best buddy in the platoon. 

As I sat there, wiping blood and crud from my face in the eye of an 
impossible hurricane, it helped to think about Arlene. Recalling her features 
drove the monsters from my mind. I played a little game with myself, not 
letting the horror rise up and engulf the picture I was drawing. 

I don’t think I’ve ever seen a better-looking woman than Arlene, 
objectively considered. She wasn’t drop-dead gorgeous in the conventional 
sense. To use an older phrase from a braver age, she was “right handsome.” 


Five-ten and compactly built, she worked out more than anyone else in the 
platoon. She had beautiful, well-cut muscles. 

(Once, when for a few days she thought she might be “with child’”—not 
mine—Gates had said, “She’s such a man, I bet she got herself pregnant.” 
He didn’t say it loudly.) 

I liked how she looked at everyone through slitted eyes, giving her a 
hooded serpent look. She was not to be trifled with, as one skank found out 
when he thought it was funny to sneak up behind her and pull down her 
pants. 

The rest of us were certainly interested in seeing all we could of her 
well-shaped posterior, but we weren’t idiots. Without turning around, she 
backhanded him perfectly and broke his nose. At the time all I could think 
of was how much I enjoyed seeing her move. We’re talking ballet here. 

Of course, there was a lot more to Arlene; she had a brain. Those are in 
short supply in the service, even in Light Drop, and I hated to see one go to 
waste. I took her to Corps music concerts, and she dragged me to old sci-fi 
movies. We got drunk together sometimes. We played poker, too; but my 
only chance against her was when I was stone-cold sober. 

One night we got so drunk that we fumbled our way into a kiss. It just 
didn’t feel right. We were buddies, not lovers. 

Arlene and I reached an unspoken agreement where we didn’t talk about 
that night. As if to prove what a pal she could be, she started setting me up 
with dates. She had girlfriends who were always first-rate in one way or 
another, and they liked to oblige her by hanging with her pal. I didn’t kick. I 
just didn’t seem able to return a commensurate favor. 

Arlene told me once how she wanted to save up some money and go to 
college someday. I didn’t hold that against her. I wished the best for her. 

The best. That thought shot down my reverie in flames. What could the 
best be for her now, in this place? Death, I guessed; anything would be 
better than gray flesh, dry, unblinking eyes, and jerking limbs. 

“No,” I heard myself talking to no one, “she’d never allow herself to be 
turned into one of those.” 

But what if this reworking took place after death? 

Swallowing hard, I stood up and decided to get back to business. I 
needed ammo; a wild shot had destroyed the magazine and receiver of one 
of the Sig-Cows; the only thing a zombie could use it for now would be as a 


war club, so I left it on the floor. Nobody had a select fire weapon, which 
was too bad; I sure missed the luxury of launching three or four rounds at a 
time toward a zombie head . . . much better chance of a bull’s-eye. On the 
other hand, if they had had one of the two select-fire M-220 Dogchoppers 
that a squad carried, I might not be alive to pick through the weaponry. 

I shoved some magazines into my ammo pockets and loaded up both 
weapons. No sense carrying another Sig-Cow. I really wanted to get my 
hands on the riot gun that Dardier usually carried, though—except it would 
probably mean ripping it out of her twitching fingers after blowing a hole in 
her pretty, blond head. 

I followed the trail of corpses another two bends of the corridor, taking 
as much ammo as I could carry without rattling like a medieval knight. We 
were all supposed to carry head-talks, so we could communicate . . . but I 
didn’t find any, which was pretty suspicious. No ELFs or MilDataBuses, 
either: nothing whatsoever that might be used to communicate what the hell 
was going on. 

And I always made time to check the faces. So long as one, particular 
face wasn’t there . . . I knew I could stand it. 


4 


I almost felt relief when I ran into two more zombies. Now that I 
knew what to do, it was just some sickening sort of exercise. I only “killed” 
one of them; the other, I just popped its rifle, then shot out its knees and 
hips; I wanted it alive, maybe to answer some questions before I smashed in 
the curling mouth with the yellow teeth. 

I didn’t recognize this one; it was a former UAC worker, used to be a 
man. It didn’t have even as much mind left as had Zombie Girl; but this 
time, I let it babble for some time: 

“Big, coming through, big, Gate is the key, killing, killing, all the killing, 
coming through, coming to kill you all, the Gate is the key, the key, hell and 
damns is the key, coming through the Gate . . . 

“Phobos! Fear, fear, fear, fear, fear! 

“Coming to Phobos, coming from Phobos, crossing the Styx, pickup 
Styx, Styx is the key.” 

I waited until it started repeating itself; after a moment, a chill crept 
down my neck: the thing was repeating itself exactly, like a tape loop. 
Suddenly more scared than I had been in hours, I put it out of its misery 
(and mine). 

I backed up into a dark alcove, praying nobody had a light-amp glasses 
or an infrared sensor. I needed to think this through. 

A single strip of hellishly bright luminescence flickered off and on high 
in the center of the ceiling; a bare sun bulb was all that was left of the 
lighting system. The strobe effect made shadows look like monsters, 
creeping toward me. But I didn’t smell any rotten citrus, and heard none of 
the characteristic zombie gibbering . . . just a strange clicking sound ahead, 
like a dolphin with laryngitis. I figured I was safe for the moment. 

Phobos was pretty obvious; they were here, at Phobos Base. They came 
to Phobos . . . but what did the thing mean saying they were coming from 


Phobos? 

I started feeling nauseated. My skin began to creep up and down my 
bones . . . If the zombie didn’t distinguish between yesterday, today, and 
tomorrow, then maybe it was telling me that Phobos was not the final target 
of the invasion; they were going to cross the River Styx, the river of the 
dead in Greek mythology. 

And what was on the other side? Well, hell, I supposed. Hades. But wait 
—if you were starting from hell, then “crossing the Styx” took you to... 

I swallowed the nausea back down. Sweat dripped down my forehead, 
stinging my eyes. 

The target was Earth. Terra mostly firma. Home sweet hovel. 

I accepted the fact that I was a dead man. After four years of Catholic 
school, run by Father Bartolomeo, Society of Jesus, I had always thought I 
was pretty much “prayed out.” Certainly, even after four years in the Corps, 
the last three in Light Drop Infantry, I hadn’t had a word to say to the Big 
Guy, if He were even listening. 

But now, for the first time, after a cumulative seventeen weeks of actual 
combat intercut into four years of military life, I finally understood that 
stupid line about there being “no atheists in foxholes.” I didn’t use the 
words that the Jesuits taught me, but I know who I was talking to, begging 
for the guts and skill not to hose up. 

“Suicide mission” was a weak term for what I was doing. I’m as afraid to 
die as the next jarhead; but goddamn it, I didn’t want to be damned as a 
walking dead! 

I told the Big Guy what I'd done wrong in the last, ah, seven years and 
promised him a lifetime of penance if He’d just forgive me and send me 
into battle shriven. It was a hollow offer, I knew; that “lifetime” was 
probably measured in hours. Thank God it’s the thought that counts. 

Taking a breath, I swung my rifle around, finger outside the trigger 
guard, and stepped out of the alcove. I continued around a corner toward the 
clicking noise. 

Suddenly I saw what looked like a working radio! Hurrying over—too 
quickly for caution’s sake—I saw that only the front part of the mechanism 
remained. The back was ripped out in a way that showed clear sabotage. Up 
to that moment, it had seemed possible that the radios were destroyed 


accidentally, casualties of battle; but this was clear evidence of at least 
human-level tactics, far beyond what I’d imagine the zombies could do. 

There was somebody else wandering around here. If I hunted long 
enough, I figured I'd find it . . . if it or they didn’t find me first. 

Turning a corner in the corridor, I saw more evidence of some kind of 
strategy: on the wall, a map to the installation had been burned beyond 
recognition, while the space around it was only slightly singed. Whoever 
that other something or somebody was, it knew that more of us would be 
coming after it; it didn’t want us to be able to find our way. 

Ahead was a hatchway, the door open. The light directly over it was 
broken; but a steady, green glow emanated from beyond the narrow 
opening; the glow did not come from any electrical source I could think of. 
Even as I moved toward the entrance, I knew I wanted to be anywhere else 
but here. A new odor assailed me, far worse than the sour lemons. This was 
the loving, sweet aroma of something that should have been buried, or 
better yet, flushed. It literally burned my nostrils. 

I fumbled for the mask that accompanied the combat armor. Jesus, I 
thought, what I wouldn’t give for a working environment suit! My hands 
shook as pulled it over my mouth and nose, wondering what horrible, toxic 
fumes I was breathing. 

The surge of air from the suit augmented the bad air; but it did little 
good. The molecules of the toxin were evidently smaller than oxygen 
molecules and didn’t react to any of the filters; I could still smell them right 
through the mask. 

Every warning klaxon in my body was screaming; my skin tingled, and 
the proverbial hair on the back of my proverbial neck jumped up and did 
some PT. I took a few tentative steps farther in, then I came up short; I'd 
found the light source. 

Pools of thick, green liquid bubbled on both sides of me. The stuff was 
luminescent, probably radioactive. It looked like boiling lava on Saint 
Patrick’s day. I wasn’t going to stop and run any experiments; but I had no 
doubt the gunk would eat right through my combat suit, given enough time. 
The prudent decision was to stay as far away from the green slime as 
humanly possible. 

No sooner had this thought crossed my mind than a ton of bricks 
slammed into me from the right, knocking the 10mm pistol out of my 


holster and into the green toxin. Something had decided to run the 
experiment after all. 

The 10mm made a hissing sound as it disappeared from view. I didn’t 
care. I had problems of my own. 

Flipping over, I struggled to get to my feet and bring my big Sig-Cow 
into play, if I could figure out what the hell hit me. The impact had blurred 
my vision. I stood up, dizzy, shaking my head. The figure that had hit me so 
hard stood just out of sight, in the shadows. I assumed it was another 
zombie, but a stronger one than I had encountered before. 

Then it cut loose with a hiss, and more of that clicking sound I had been 
hearing. Well, one little mystery solved. 

The strength in this—zombie?—inspired greater caution. I rolled my M- 
211 around and skated to the side, waiting for the creature to come to me. 
He did. 

As the large body moved into sight, I saw brown, leathery skin, rough 
like alligator hide, with ivory-white horns sticking out from chest, arms, and 
legs. The head was inhumanly huge, with maddened slits of red for eyes. It 
was a monster! 

It was a demon. 


5 


My first reaction was to laugh. This was a childhood nightmare, a 
bogeyman. The part of me that had worked so hard to grow up just couldn’t 
believe in something that looked like this. 

Only trouble was, the damned thing didn’t appreciate its own absurdity. 
It took a few steps toward me where the light was better. Movement made 
the figure less ridiculous. Shadows played across its rough hide, and I saw 
that the wrinkled flesh under the eyes were wet. I hated to admit that it 
really was flesh. The eyes flickered with an angry red light. The worst 
features were the lips curling back to reveal ugly, yellow canines. This was 
no Halloween mask with a rigid grimace. Inhuman as this monster was, I 
couldn’t confuse it with an animal. 

Just an alien bastard, I told myself over and over; I was a lot more 
comfortable with the idea of an alien, even an alien soldier—a cosmic 
grunt. Nota. ..ademon. 

The extraterrestrial stopped advancing. It turned its head at an angle no 
human could copy, but kept its eyes fixed on me. Mexican standoff. 

Despite it having attacked me first, I couldn’t shake the thought that it 
was my responsibility to try to make contact. No communication seemed 
possible with the hollow shells who used to be my buddies or UAC 
workers; the most I could drag out of them was simple parroting of what 
they had heard, before or after death. 

But this one was different . . . this one was—how could I fire up a 
conversation with an alien “demon” whose interest in humans seemed 
purely nutritional? 

“Who are you?” I asked. I figured it wouldn’t know English, but might at 
least guess from the tone what I had asked. But it threw me a curve by 
smiling wide and silently mouthing the same question, Who are you, 
seeming to mock me. 


I tried again: “Human being,’ I said, tapping my armored chest. 
“Understand? Do you talk?” 

Nothing. Nada. I took a calculated risk: I wasn’t about to put down my 
weapon; but I slowly extended one hand, palm forward, in what I hoped 
was a universal symbol of nonaggression. 

There was a response but I didn’t quite know what to make of it. The 
grotesque humanoid slowly lifted its right hand up to its shoulder and 
stroked the white protrusion of bone, allowing its thumb to linger on the 
sharp point. The sight was very strange and it did not suggest peaceful 
intentions. Definitely a Mexican standoff. 

I suddenly got nervous about leaving my hand exposed. The sharp teeth 
suggested a healthy appetite. I became acutely aware of my environment. 
The bubbling, green sludge behind me burbled louder, and for the first time, 
I thought I heard the monster breathing. 

The breathing stopped. 

Pure instinct took over. Soldiers sometimes take a sharp breath just 
before attacking . . . some hold their breath as the floodgates open, releasing 
enough adrenaline to turn coward into hero. 

The monster attacked so quickly I couldn’t have gotten a shot off even if 
my Sig-Cow hadn’t jammed. 

Whatever the thing was, it was not stupid. It charged me, clawing for my 
throat with one set of nails while the other hand fended off my bayonet. 

That was the only good news; if it was afraid of my blade, then surely 
the alien would bleed if I stuck it 

Tees 3 

I stopped pushing and suddenly pulled with the monster, instead of 
against it. I fell backward, and four hundred pounds of leathery skin and 
iron muscle dropped on top of me—and right onto my bayonet. With an 
inhuman scream that nearly ruptured my eardrums, the demon died, 
convulsing a few last times before instantly stiffening into what felt like a 
stone statue. 

I was mighty damned glad to learn that demons did bleed, at least on 
Phobos. I was relieved for some reason that the blood was red. 

I was less pleased to feel the stone weight of the monster crushing me 
into the floor. Jesus and Mary, did I wish I could turn off the Phobos gravity 
generator, just for a moment! 


Years spent in Catholic school came back to me; I remembered an old 
penguin, Sister Beatrice, who was obsessed with the biblical injunction to 
avoid unclean things. Unclean things! 

My stomach heaved; shaking the body off me with more strength than 
I’d ever experienced before, I almost vomited on the very spot where blood 
pulsed out of the alien’s belly wound. 

Jumping too quickly to my feet, I slipped in the slick, red goo—right 
next to one of the bubbling pits of green sludge. Heat poured from the 
boiling, green liquid waste. I didn’t want that stuff any closer to my face 
than it was already; I had a feeling the luminescence was not harmless 
phosphorous, and this didn’t seem the time to run any tests. 

I took a moment to catch my breath. It had been difficult enough to 
accept the fact of people—buddies!—turned into zombies; but this thing at 
my feet meant anything could happen next. I didn’t want to let my 
imagination run wild. Reality was bad enough at the moment. 

Not since childhood had I really felt a desire to pray. The first monsters 
of my life had been stern nuns refusing to answer the questions of an 
inquisitive mind. But now I felt a need for God, if only to have a power big 
enough to swear an oath on. 

“Pll stop you,” I promised, “whatever you are, however many you are.” It 
helped to say the words out loud, even if one of the bastards heard me. Hell, 
they could hear my footsteps, anyway. “If there is a God, please let me live 
just long enough to stop these monsters from dropping ship to Earth!” 

The small voice of reason was growing smaller all the time; scientific 
knowledge! Physical law! Like the song says, biggest lie you ever saw. 

Survival came first; killing lots of monsters. Learning something useful 
about the enemy was just fine, so long as it came third. And there was the 
problem of how I would communicate any useful discovery; and to whom. 

Ahead were the remains of yet another smashed radio. A human hand 
still touched the controls. The hand was not attached to an arm. The best 
explanation was that the body probably lay dissolving at the bottom of the 
pool of green slime. 

Making my way out of this section seemed the most important move for 
all three goals, if only to get away from the hot, green liquid. The monster 
had thrown me off. I couldn’t help imagining the creature from the black 
lagoon, or green lagoon, waiting at the bottom of every toxic pool. 


If I could meet one two-legged nightmare, I could meet more. And I 
don’t just mean more like the ones I’d already fought; there could be worse 
things, anything! What were the laws for monsters? Thoughts of horrors 
crawling around on the bottom of radioactive sludge pools gave way to even 
more unlikely scenarios. How about creatures that could exist outside the 
domes, in airless space? And if they didn’t need to breathe, maybe those 
aliens didn’t bleed, either. 

I made myself stop. If I kept this up, I wouldn’t need to be picked off by 
the enemy; I’d be saving them the trouble. 

I heaved a sigh of relief to leave the toxic-spill room, clearing the 
jammed brass from my Sig-Cow receiver; it made little difference—I only 
had two or three rounds left and nowhere to stock up. 

As if being rewarded for a bad attitude, there was another collection of 
inanimate dead just through the doorway, awaiting inspection. For the first 
time since this nightmare began I actually felt relief at the sight of human 
corpses. At least they were human. Not zombies, not monsters. If ’d been 
more careful—or paying more attention to my imagination—it might have 
occurred to me that one of the zombies could be pretending to be a corpse. 
But somewhere in the back of my brain I had already figured out that the 
zombies were no-brainers. They weren’t about to pull tricks. 

There was something very reassuring about thinking about things that 
weren’t possible (or at least not very probable). Sure beat the hell out of 
imagining supermonsters that could do anything! As I surveyed the dead 
men, the damaged weapons, the lack of ammo, and for dessert, a smashed 
radio, I finally understood what must have been going through the minds of 
these soldiers as their lives were ripped out of them. 

I understood why they hadn’t done the intelligent thing and withdrawn, 
regrouped, reported: they’d been so overcome with revulsion, just like 
Yours Truly, that they’d simply charged into the mob (of zombies? 
monsters?) in a berserker fury, killing anything that got in the way. They 
stopped thinking and started reacting instead—and were cut down, one by 
one. 

A heavy rumble from behind grabbed my attention. Setting a new record 
for spinning around, I realized I had to go back into the blasted toxic-spill 
room to check this out. 

So I did. 


The latest surprise: when I killed the monster, it evidently fell across a 
lift lever I hadn’t noticed. I arrived at this conclusion because of the large, 
metal platform which finished lowering itself right in front of my nose. 
Beyond the lift was a brand new corridor I hadn’t seen before. 

To enter or not to enter? That was as good a question as any I’d had all 
day. Staying behind meant facing inconceivable danger and unimaginable 
odds. Whereas going forward meant facing unimaginable danger and 
inconceivable odds. Or something. 

The corridor ahead had two appealing features: there were no slime pits 
and the light was brighter. The latter decided me. There had to have been 
some good reason to make the choice I made. 

I backed up and took a flying leap; fear lent my feet wings . . . but not jet 
engines, unfortunately. I landed short and teetered on the edge of the 
biggest pool of green crud in creation. I windmilled my arms... if I hadn’t 
stepped back, I would have fallen back. 

For a second all my foot felt was icy, icy cold, as if I'd stepped into 
liquid nitrogen. Then the pain struck. I tried to yank my foot free, but my 
muscles wouldn’t respond! 

My leg was on fire from toe to thigh. I lurched forward, falling on my 
face; my foot was free of the toxin, but I shouted through clenched teeth. 

Fighting a suicidal impulse to grab my still-wet foot, I wrapped my arms 
around my gut instead. If a zombie or monster demon had stumbled across 
me then, it could have snuffed me with my blessing. It was minutes before 
the throbbing pain in my leg subsided. I scraped my foot against the floor, 
rubbing off as much of the toxin as I could; but my leg swelled tight and 
angry red inside my ruined boot. 

But at least, thank God, the pool was behind me. 

The new corridor seemed antiseptic and clean after what I’d just stepped 
in. If there were unpleasant odors, they didn’t penetrate my visor. 

I followed the corridor until I came to a room on the right. Something 
made me hesitate about going in. It wasn’t a sense of danger or anything 
like that. Maybe it was because the door was closed. Mostly they’d been 
open. I don’t normally credit sixth sense stuff or mysticism; but I’ve learned 
in combat that you ignore your instincts at your peril. There are human 
“predator senses” that normal, civilized life pretty much breeds out of us. 


I had my weapon at the ready even though two shots from now the Sig- 
Cow would be nothing but a fancy spear. 

Kicking the door was easy; looking into the room was hard. There was 
one lone body on the floor, female, her back to me. 


6 


For a cold-gut second, I thought she might be Arlene. The 
impression lasted only a few seconds; then I saw it was Ti “Dude” Dardier. 
We’d fought together pretty closely in Kefiristan, and you get so you 
recognize a buddy from behind, especially females in a crack fighting unit. 

Her face was unmarked, still cute, still a little girl with red hair who had 
a big surprise for any man who thought she was easy pickings. I wondered 
if a monster or zombie had gotten her. The ugly wound was in her stomach. 

There was something funny about her posture; she lay as if she had a 
secret. 

I stared for a moment, coaxing her dead body to talk to me. Then I 
figured it out: Dudette was lying on top of something, shielding it from dry 
zombie eyes. 

I touched her gently, then gingerly slipped over her corpse. Dude Dardier 
was lying on top of the pump-action riot gun I’'d been wishing for earlier— 
her death-day present for Yours Truly. 

I felt like a ghoul, but feelings were a luxury. With a shotgun in my 
arsenal, my survival rating took a big leap up the charts. 

I checked the bore and found no obstructions. There were plenty of 
shells in the bandoleer around her body. I thanked Dudette for being a 
Marine to the end . . . semper fi, Mac. 

Back in the corridor, I found remains of a map on the wall. The Bad 
Guys evidently followed a plan, proven by destroyed radio gear and 
vandalized wall maps. But this time there was just enough left of the map to 
figure out the basic direction toward the lift, which I prayed was still 
working. Being properly armed did wonders for my psychology; I decided 
maybe I would do well to generate a tactical plan. 

There is no north or south on Phobos, but I oriented myself along the 
facility’s major axis. Getting to the nuclear plant was the next logical move; 


it had the largest concentration of equipment . . . and perhaps even an 
untrained engineer like me could jerry-rig some gear into a working radio. 

I found the lift without further molestation; naturally, it was broken, shot 
to hell—the hydraulics leaked away from numerous gunshot holes. But the 
manual escape hatch still worked. Placing myself back into a narrow, 
confined space was about as appealing as it sounded, and my damned 
imagination started bugging me again at precisely the moment duty called. 
My imagination was not very patriotic; it needed six weeks of boot camp. 

There was a dim light in the shaft, very, very dim. Every square foot of 
the base was supposed to be constantly lit, bright as day, except for the 
barracks. Someone in charge must have been mugged by a flashlight when 
he was a kid and wanted nothing more to do with them. Maybe I shouldn’t 
have complained; light was light. 

As I climbed down the long shaft, it occurred to me to think about 
something cheerful, a silver lining that must exist somewhere in these storm 
clouds. There had to be something. 

And there was. I hadn’t found Arlene’s body yet . . . and so long as I 
didn’t know what had happened to her, there was hope. 

I figured the nuclear plant must be at least six stories down. Just keep 
climbing, that was all I could do. Climb. Hope. Watch out for demons. Real 
simple. I preferred thinking about Arlene. 


* OK O* 


I remembered the day she showed up from Parris Island and joined the 
real Corps, the fighting Corps. I looked up from monkeying with the sticky 
belt-advance on a .60 caliber auto-stabilized, and I saw a brutal babe in 
cammies, spats, webbing, and sporting a newly shaved high-and-tight. 
Catching her eye told me all I had to know. She knew what she was doing, 
all right. The Corps is protective of its haircut, flat on the top and shaved on 
the sides. We’re talking a sign of distinction, a challenge thrown at every 
other service. God help the Navy, Army, or Space Force puke who shows up 
on one of our bases in a high-and-tight! What happens afterward is why 
God made Captain’s Mast. 

But Arlene was no innocent. She wore her cut high and proud, and wore 
a single, red, private’s stripe. 


Lieutenant Weems (pre-punch) took one look at Arlene Sanders, a long, 
hard look, and curled his lip. He watched her hand her packet to PFC Dodd, 
who stared at her like she had two heads. So far as I know, that was the first 
time they ever met, they who were destined for . . . well, not love, exactly; 
extreme lustlike. (After about a year of ignoring him with all her might, 
then another six months of despising him, she shamefacedly confessed to 
me that she’d spent the night in his flat.) 

All in all, not the best-foot-forward on this first day for the first woman 
in Fox Company. 

Of course, the opinion of Lieutenant Weems was already a debased 
currency by this time. But the opinion of the other men mattered. And no 
one could express that company opinion with more eloquence than Gunnery 
Sergeant Goforth, the company’s “grand old man.” Hell, he was in his late 
thirties, an eighteen-year Marine, the last ten in Light Drop. 

Goforth looked like Aldo Ray in those old John Wayne movies. He was 
heavyset, muscular but not fat; he shaved his head but would probably be 
bald anyway. Goforth was a Franks tank with legs, a few freckles mixed in 
along with the Rolled Homogenous Armor. 

The gunny made a big deal of sauntering over to Arlene and let loose 
with his thick, Georgian drawl: “Hooo-eeee! Where’ud the lay-dee get thuh 
purty ‘do?” 

She looked him in the eye. That was all. Not a bad answer, really, but I 
thought that under the circumstances a few words of reason might be in 
order. 

I volunteered myself for the task. Partly because I liked a woman with 
guts; partly because I respected the men in the Corps and felt their position 
could be expressed in a more thoughtful manner than Gunny Goforth was 
likely to manage. But mainly I spoke up because at some deep level I hate 
all rules, symbols, rituals, fighting words, gang colors, routines, 
decorations, medals, trophies, badges . . . and anything else that suggests 
one human being is to be taken more seriously than another in a given 
situation simply on the basis of plumage. Besides, I was making no 
headway with the damned .60 cal. 

I was sitting on the mess hall table and felt very much above it all as I 
said, “Private, a high-and-tight is not a fashion statement. You gotta earn it.” 


That seemed a nice ice breaker. She must have agreed because she spoke 
to me, not Goforth. “I’m as much a Marine as the next man,’ she said, 
glancing at me before returning her steady attention back to the gunny. 

The first retort that crossed my mind was to take a big bite of the red 
apple that happened to be in my hand. The longer it took to chew and 
swallow the piece of apple, the more profound would be my clever 
rejoinder, it seemed to me. 

So I did. And Goforth took a step closer to Arlene, deliberately breaking 
her space. Arlene stood her ground, not budging an inch. 

In between bites of the apple, I thought I would essay another arbitration. 
“You know,” I essayed, “a high-and-tight is not mil-spec for ladies.” 

“It’s not regulation for men, either,’ she shot back. There was no arguing 
with that, but there was plenty of apple left to crunch. 

Gunny Goforth didn’t have an apple. “Any Muh-reen who wears thet 
do,” he said, “sure as hell is gonna earn it, missy.” I thought the “missy” 
was a bit much. 

Arlene Sanders leaned forward into his space, close enough to either kiss 
him or bite off his round knob of a nose. Instead, she said two words: 
“Youre on.” 

Goforth was just as stubborn. He was native to Georgia but might as well 
have been from Missouri when it came to matters of proof. “Every Muh- 
reen is a rifleman fust,’ he said. “If’n you want to spoht thet thang, missy, 
then you had best pick up yer cute lil’ buns and follow me tuh the rifle 
range.” 

She gave him a curt nod. Challenge accepted. They started to leave, then 
Goforth noticed my juicy, red apple, which had tasted much better than the 
discussion, far as I was concerned. 

“Hey, Fly,’ he said, “howzabout grabbin’ thet sack o’ apples?” 

As I hoisted the apples and made tracks, I could honestly say that I 
didn’t have a clue what old Goforth was up to. 

The range was a short walk. Every man who had been present for the 
exchange of words followed along. No one wanted to miss entertainment of 
this high a caliber, no pun intended. 

Goforth walked on over to Arlene and said, “Private, you need a whole 
helpin’ o’ guts to wear thet ’do. Takes more’n jes’ a steady rifle hand, thet it 
do!” At least he didn’t call her “missy” this time. 


Holding up his hand, palm toward me, he shouted, “Fly, toss me one of 
those apples. Ya’ll watch a history lesson.” Now that I finally had the idea, I 
was none too happy, but Arlene just smiled—a little, thin smile. I think she 
guessed what the gun’ was scheming. 

I slapped the apple into the gunnery sergeant’s paw. He casually tossed 
and caught it a few times, then asked Arlene: “Yuh lak historee, lil’ lady?” 
He was laying the accent on so thick I could barely understand him. 

“Let me guess,” she said with a thick grin. “You like William Tell.” 

Goforth looked crestfallen that she had outguessed him, stealing some 
wind from his sails. But if verbal teasing wouldn’t do the job, he was more 
than ready to push this thing on to the real thing. I could see it in his face; 
there was no humor left. 

When I had first joined Fox Company, Goforth went out of his way to 
make me feel welcome. About the worst he did was to tag me with the 
nickname Fly. He didn’t bag on me the way he was doing to Arlene. He 
gestured to Dodd to bring over the artillery, and Dodd brought a .30-99 
bolt-action sniper rifle, top of the line. Goforth flashed Arlene a big, soapy 
grin; but she held her ground. 

Made me wonder, not just about the gun’, but the other guys, who leered 
and chuckled unpleasantly. Plenty of men are solid guys, decent fathers and 
husbands, but revert to Wolfman when confronted by physical prowess in a 
woman. 

As Goforth lived up to his name and went forward with the William Tell 
bit, I was getting panicky . . . but I kept it to myself. She was going to play 
this one out to the bitter end. I figured that from the way she planted her 
feet, put her arms behind her and said, “Go for it!” Abruptly, everybody 
stopped laughing. Gunny Goforth noticed but wasn’t about to back down 
with eight, ’'m sure it was, eight guys watching. With an almost delicate 
concern, he carefully placed the apple on her head. Then he took the .30-99 
and slowly backed away from her. He aimed just as carefully and said, in a 
voice that had lost all the sarcasm, “Last chance, honey.’ I thought “honey” 
sounded better than “missy.” 

Arlene didn’t move, but I could see that she was trembling ever so 
slightly beneath her bravado. I sure as hell didn’t blame her. Goforth took a 
deep breath and said, “All right, darlin’ . . . I suggest in the strongest terms 
thet you don’t flinch none.” 


I was the one who jumped when he squeezed off a shot—and damned if 
the apple didn’t split perfectly down the middle, each half falling on either 
side of her head! Everybody let out his breath, and a ragged cheer erupted. 

“Way to go, Gunny!” said one man. 

“Fox Company ichiban!” said another. 

We’d forgotten one item. We’d forgotten that Arlene had put her skull on 
the line. The drama wasn’t over until she said it was. 

As Goforth basked in his moment of glory, the boys all praising him, 
Arlene walked toward him. Her hands were behind her back and she was 
smiling sweetly. 

I saw what she was carrying before the gun’ did. She held an apple up 
until he saw it; then she tossed it to him. 

Silence again; nobody moved. Then just as smoothly as you please, 
Arlene Sanders picked up the .30-99 from the table, staring expectantly at 
Goforth and cocking one of her eyebrows. 

I never doubted what Goforth would do. His basic sense of fair play 
could be counted on; and he had guts. He wasn’t about to lose his men’s 
respect. Not Goforth! So, in the words of the old-time baseball player, it 
was deja vu all over again. 

He put the apple on his head, his icy eyes boring into Arlene’s. She 
watched him just as intently; no lovers were ever more focused on one 
another. 

She cocked and raised the rifle, which wasn’t even fitted with a scope, 
just iron sights. A few of the men backed farther away from the cone of fire 
surrounding the gunnery sergeant. That pissed me off, so I deliberately took 
a few steps closer to the duel. Something about this girl inspired confidence 
that she was no more likely to blow away a spectator than the gunnery 
sergeant. 

Goforth had his own concerns: “If you have to miss,” he said so softly 
that it didn’t even sound like him, “please tuh make it high?” He smiled 
with an effort. The request seemed reasonable enough. 

Arlene said nothing. She lifted the rifle nice and slow. She didn’t make 
us wait; she pounded out a shot, and the apple was blown off Goforth’s 
head. Corporal Stout ran over and picked it up. It was still mostly in one 
piece, but there was a gratifying furrow a little high off the center. 


After a long moment, during which no one said a word, Goforth walked 
up to Arlene Sanders. Putting hands on his hips, he made a big show of 
inspecting her high-and-tight, while we all held our breath. 

Goforth bent down, examined her right side, left side, back, front, then 
looked her evenly in the eye, winked and nodded. “It’s you, Private,’ he 
said. And I was pretty damned sure he wouldn’t be calling her “missy” 
again She didn’t miss, you see. 

Some of the boys took to calling her Will, though. 


7 


The odds against Arlene’s survival in this hellish maelstrom were 
astronomical; but then, so they were against mine. Hope that she might have 
made it kept me going; fury at the thought of her death spurred me to 
action. Maybe just when I was running out of steam, the need for revenge 
would inspire Yours Truly. 

As if to test my newfound resolve, Phobos threw some more at me. 
Glancing down, I saw that the access shaft did not descend the full six 
stories required to reach the nuclear plant. The ladder ended in a few ragged 
shreds of metal; an explosion had cut off the rest of that route. 

Of course, I could always get to the nuclear plant level really fast, so 
long as I didn’t mind the sudden stop at the end. 

“Damn, I knew this was too good to be true,” I said out loud. Just before 
running out of ladder, I saw a thick, metal hatchway leading to the next 
level down. 

It looked solid, heavy; a pressure lock held it shut; I would have to spin 
the wheel to open the door, a happy trick when the ladder ended a couple of 
rungs above the hatch. 

For a moment I was stymied. I could just barely reach the wheel by 
hanging one-handed from the last rung; but I had no leverage . . . I couldn’t 
turn it to save my life. I took a deep breath, closed my eyes, and thought for 
several seconds. 

Jesus—what am I, stupid all of a sudden? J rotated around the ladder, 
lowered myself until my lower legs poked through the last hole, then slowly 
let my body down until I dangled upside down from my knees. Now I had 
the leverage; all it took was muscle. 

I cranked the wheel clockwise, loosening it until it spun freely. I wrestled 
open the door—and now for the hard part. 


Holding tight to the wheel of the now-open door, I straightened my legs, 
dropping heavily as the wheel spun. I clung to it grimly, swinging back and 
forth until I finally stopped swinging. 

I edged around the door, caught the corresponding wheel on the inside 
and swung myself up and into the shaft. I lost nothing but any desire I might 
have had to take my name to heart and become a Human Fly as a career 
path. 

The access shaft led me into a tunnel where the light was crappy again, 
flickering on and off like some sicko nightclub. It was tall enough to stand, 
and I did. 

After five meters I decided this was the weirdest stretch of architecture 
yet. The light was lousy, but it was good enough to make out the walls— 
plain and gray with an oddly rough-hewn surface, as if hacked out of the 
rock with a magic ax. 

Large, rectangular designs everywhere gave the feeling of a colossal 
cemetery. More than anything else, the strong impression of something truly 
ancient and evil permeated the narrow corridor. Alien, and yet familiar 
somehow. It was as if I'd been cast inside the oldest labyrinth in the 
universe and would spend the rest of my life trying to find my way through 
the maze. 

Damn imagination acting up again . . . memory was better; at least it 
gave me something to hold on to. A link to the past, a better past. 

Then I saw old Gunnery Sergeant Goforth, walking down the corridor in 
my direction. The failing light made it difficult to make out skin tones; but 
the smooth, purposeful way he walked made me think he couldn’t be a 
zombie. 

It was Gunny Goforth—and he was alive! 

“Gunny!” I shouted, ecstatic to have finally found another live one in this 
nightmare. 

He didn’t answer; my God, that should have told me something. 

He raised his old .30-99 and aimed it right at my chest. I threw myself to 
the floor just as the bullet seared over my head. 

“Damn you to hell!” I shouted, outraged that the universe had decided to 
foist a new, improved zombie on me. Too late; I’m sure he already was— 
and me with him. 


This new horror seemed even more unfair than that crazy brown monster 
with the spikes. I’d settled into a nice, predictable pattern about what to do 
with zombies. No fair changing the rules now! 

Hey, Gunny, you’re still a pal. 

He marched straight for me, no deviations, no ducking, no turning 
sideways to make a more difficult target. An obliging guy in his way. Of 
course, he was working the bolt on his sniper rifle, trying to blow my head 
from Phobos back to Earth. 

I didn’t just lie on the floor, waiting for that unacceptable outcome. I had 
plans of my own. 

In life, Gunny Goforth could shoot—hell, could shoot the apple off a 
young Marine’s head. In death, he shot better than all the other zombies. 
And he blinked. 

I rolled back and forth, waiting until he was ten meters away; then I 
shouldered the riot gun and squeezed. 

It was the biggest mess I’d made on this godforsaken rock of a moon so 
far. The splatter was sort of an artistic statement. But I must have gotten 
something in my eye. I kept blinking, but it wouldn’t go away. 

Somebody was laughing, sort of a crazy, whacked-out cackle. “Shut up!” 
I screamed at the jokester, wiping my cheeks. The laughter stopped, and 
only then did I realize the mirth was courtesy of a poor jarhead named Fly. 

This was no good. I had to get a handle on the situation. Running 
multiplication tables in my head helped me chill while I scavenged 
Goforth’s pack for ammo. My breathing slowed to something sane, and my 
heartbeat took a licking but kept on ticking. 

In fact, I was so calm I barely blinked when a whirring, metallic skull 
sailed past my head. 

This time I was sure my imagination was off on a wild toot. I'd never 
done hallucinogens as a kid, and it just wasn’t fair for my imagination to 
suggest a giant, white skull had gone flying past (on its way to the demonic 
head shop, no doubt). So I made a deal with my imagination: if it didn’t 
throw any more Halloween balloons at me, I’d give it a break when it 
wanted to go traipsing down memory lane. I can be fair. 

I ran like a madman up the corridor, jogging a couple of times. Whatever 
it was, I’d lost it for now. 


Emerging into a big open room made me feel more claustrophobic. That 
might sound fairly nutty but you’d have to see this place for yourself. I 
wasn’t bothered by the incredibly high, arched ceiling, supported by 
grotesque pillars that would be more at home in some ancient palace in 
India. No, what bothered me was that this huge room was full of barrels of 
that noxious, green liquid I thought I’d left behind—and good riddance. 

The empty, cavernous room was a perfect place for a congregation of 
Halloween goblins and all species of zombie, fast and slow, dull and the 
cognitive elite. 

No sooner had this unpleasant thought crossed my cranium than the 
floodgates opened and they started pouring into the room from all 
directions. 

I shrank back into the shadows, trying to look dead and mindless; it 
worked for a few moments . . . none of the zombies seemed to notice me. 

There really wasn’t time for a sanity check, but I ran a quick one 
anyway. I’d read about a mental condition or a philosophy (I forget which) 
called solipsism: you think of something, and it happens. The ultimate case 
is when you think you're all that exists, and the whole universe is your 
dream. Man, I was ready to buy into that, if only I could dream away these 
monsters as quickly as I seemed to be filling up this room with them! 

Well... what can I lose? I closed my eyes and concentrated real hard, 
wishing away the bogeymen. 

While I was thus occupied, I was blown off my feet by an explosion and 
searing heat right over my head. Opening my eyes to excruciating pain, I 
discovered I wasn’t alone on the floor: whatever had blown me down got 
the nearest few zombies as well. 

I decided that solipsism was a load of crap. 

And when I looked up, my old friend was back, the crusty, brown 
monster with ivory-white spikes . . . and he’d brought his buddies. They 
watched me stagger to my feet, and they laughed. 

Then one of them wound up and threw something, some sort of mucus 
ball that burst into bloodred flames as it left the creature’s hand. I dived 
across a burned zombie, and the flaming phlegm spun me buttocks over 
boots. 

I looked for a weapon, a glint of metal, a tube, something! But no, these 
demons were actually producing the fire with their bare hands . . . and their 


aim was deadly. 

The monsters hissed, pointing directly at Yours Truly; then the zombies 
noticed me for the first time and began shooting. They weren’t too 
particular about innocent zombies getting in the way, either—and whenever 
one zombie would shoot another, or a demon would pelt a bunch with a 
flaming mucus ball, the monster victims would turn on their monster allies, 
completely forgetting about me. While I ran screaming from one side of the 
room to the other, I filed that littlhe datum somewhere in the back of my 
brain for future use. 

Now the room was really filling up with at least a dozen zombies and 
three leathery demons . . . and again I dived to the side as a whirring, 
screaming hunk of steel buzzed my helmet. This time there was no mistake: 
it was a goddamned flying skull with flaming rocket exhaust spewing out the 
back. It turned and banked, trying to mow me down and chew me up with 
razor-sharp, steel teeth, like one of those wind-up “chattering skulls” gone 
mad. 

But the fireballs were the main problem; the brown demons were a lot 
tougher than the zombies. Suddenly, I was grateful for the pillars; they 
provided cover, at least. Making a mad dash for the nearest, I fired off the 
shotgun at the remaining zombies. 

Catching my breath, I risked running to the next pillar. This time a 
fireball almost fried me. There was just no way I could get to the demons 
from here without being toasted . . . and the shotgun range was too short to 
pop them where I crouched. 

While I dithered, I heard a whirring behind me, then a harsh, iron 
screech. Sure enough, the flying skull had sailed around the pillars and 
spotted me again. 

I can take care of you at least, you F/X reject! 1 whipped the riot gun 
around and fired from the hip, not even taking time to aim. 

It was the best mistake of my life. 

The little bugger skittered out of the way; I tried to track as I fired, and I 
popped one of the toxic barrels instead. 

It exploded with a terrific concussion, kicking me in the body armor like 
a mule and tearing off a chuck of my kevlar vest. The skull vanished in a 
spray of metal gears and exploding JP-5. 


Almost immediately, my bruised eardrums were assaulted by another 
explosion, then another and a fourth. Five or six more barrels touched off in 
rapid succession. All I could think was thank God I was on the other side of 
the pillar. 

An acrid cloud of blue smoke swirled around the walls and floor. . . 
residue from the explosive oxidation of the toxic goo. Gasping, I peeked 
around the pillar at a scene of astonishing carnage. 

Zombies and demons alike had been torn to shreds and strips of gray 
flesh, their parts mingling in a hellish mulligatawny. The stench of a 
thousand sour lemons permeated the room, even driving out the horrible, 
burning smell of the toxic fumes. Jesus, I thought, J hope the cameras got 
the shot. 

I climbed shakily to my feet and padded toward the door, chastened by 
the awesome destructive power in those forty-gallon drums. At the edge of 
the room I found the only other survivor. 

The demon crawled along the ground with its hands, one leg blown 
entirely off and the other twisted into a crazy angle. It leaked yellow pus, 
globules that burst into flame as soon as they dripped off the monster’s 
body. 

I leveled my shotgun at its head. “Die, you dumb animal,’ I said with a 
smile. 

“‘Aaanimaaal,” repeated the demon, “not .. .” 

I paused, startled. I didn’t know they could talk. “You’re right,’ I 
prodded, “‘at least animals kill you clean or leave you alone.” 

It twisted its head all the way around to stare up at me while lying belly 
down on the floor. My stomach turned at the sight. “You—are aanimaals 
when we fix planet.” 

I curled my lip, but my heart leaped. Which planet was that? Mars? Or 
did the aliens’ plan include Earth? ““We’ll mow you down as fast as you 
bubble up out of the sewers, you piece of filth.” 

The alien monster laughed, opening its mouth wide enough to swallow a 
man’s head. “Weee throw rocks . . . big rocks.” 

The image was ludicrous; but I got a premonitory shudder. Somehow, I 
guessed the emphasis was on the word “big.” 


8 


Despite my better judgment, I was too intrigued for the moment 
by the sound of pure evil pleading its case. “Why haven’t the others spoken 
to me? Can you all talk?” 

It opened its mouth wide, exposing gums full of squirming cilia and 
teeth that rolled and shifted position. “Not .. . all ssssame, like you-mans 
not sssame.” 

The alien crawled on a bit farther. I don’t think it was trying to escape; it 
knew that was impossible. I began to worry that it was leading me toward 
something. Ahead of me was a greenish stone wall carved in bas relief with 
a hideous, demonic face. Somehow, I doubted that was an original 
furnishing in the Phobos base of the Union Aerospace Corporation. 

“How aren’t we the same?” I prodded. I felt in my gut that I was on the 
verge of something important. 

“Ssssome .. . fear,” it gasped. Its face showed no sign of distress, but I 
knew from the shudder that wracked its body that it was very near death. 
“Othersss sssstrong . . . you ssstrong.” 

Good Lord—was this alien thing admitting a grudging respect for Fly 
Taggart? 

“Few ssstrong, like you ssstrong . . . mosst good for ssslavesss. You-man 
ssslavesss.” 

A thought buried deep behind my ears thrust itself forward. I wasn’t too 
fatigued to pick up that slip of the tongue; even a tongue as thick and 
brutish as this one. Few strong—others strong . . . there must be other 
humans who were still themselves and still breathing! 

When hell came to Phobos, I had to keep hope locked up in a small 
space without a zip code. 

I kept a poker face; the monster might be smart enough to spot my 
eagerness at the possibility that one of the living might be Arlene. 


Any human survivor would change the Phobos situation dramatically: 
food and water were minor problems, but I could only operate so long 
without sleep. With no one to stand guard, giving in to exhaustion was 
suicide. But I couldn’t keep going forever; and if I couldn’t rest, all the 
ammo in the solar system would not save me. 

“T’m touched by your concern for my survival,” I said. 

“Deal,” he unexpectedly offered, ignoring the sarcasm. “You . . . live; 
you work; you help.” 

All I had to do was work with the alien invaders and help them conquer 
the human race, and they might graciously allow me to live as a slave. 
Jesus, how tempting, I thought. 

I decided that I liked the ones who grunt better. What did these creeps 
want from me? “I’ve got a great idea. Why don’t you tell me what the hell 
you're after?” 

The thing laughed. The sound grated on my nerves like a ripped bagpipe. 
“Hell... we after,” it declared. “Ssssurrender . . . help; you live, you-man.” 

“As a zombie?” 

“You live, not deadwalk; you sssee othersss.” 

“What others? Who else survived? Did a girl survive?” Great, Fly; nice 
and subtle. Does it even know what a girl is? Does it care? 

“You help . . . you sssee othersss.” 

I stared down at the loathsome thing. I knew I had gotten all the intel 
from it that I could. “Let me answer,’ I said at last, “louder than mere words 
can do. Tell me if this is tough enough.” 

Without another thought, I pointed the shotgun at the monster’s upper 
chest and pumped a round at point-blank range. The alien jerked—then 
amazingly, stared up at me, still alive by a thread. 

The alien grimaced, facial muscles finally growing rigid. Then for a 
moment it relaxed. “We could eat anybody onccce,” it declared. Then it 
stopped moving; even the cilia in its mouth stood up straight and froze. The 
demon was dead. 

After catching my breath, I started getting angry. It was one thing to fight 
a human enemy, but battling malignant demons? Every time I killed one of 
these humanoid things, I felt like doing a hundred more. That might be the 
only good to come of this latest encounter. Give no quarter and kill, kill, 


kill. Kind of reassuring to learn that all that Marine training hadn’t been a 
waste of time. 

Of course, the rational portion of my brain still made plans. I wanted to 
climb down and out of this hangar and reach my next objective, the nuclear 
plant. The plant was the most dangerous item to fall into enemy hands. 
Better it should fall into my hands. 

Making one last circuit of the zombie bodies, I scavenged for blessed 
ammunition. I’d have killed for a decent backpack; come to think of it, 
that’s probably how I would have to get one, I was running out of pockets 
for the ammo. 

So, how to get out of the hangar? My playmates found their way in; all I 
had to do was reverse the process. First thing was to hug the wall and make 
a nice, slow circuit of the big, ugly room. 

The damned monsters bothered me a lot less than the architecture 
changing on me. I’d never been in Phobos Base before, but I’d talked to 
guys down on Mars who knew these installations; there was no way this 
place hadn’t undergone a change as bug-nut crazy as the demonic characters 
themselves. 

And what made that more upsetting than the monsters was the idea that 
the floor you walked on, the wall you brushed against, the damn place could 
turn on you and become something else. Like a cartoon world that suddenly 
turns everything into rubber . . . except you. 

If this kept up, Yours Truly was going to place his imagination on short 
rations. 

I leaned against the wall, and suddenly it was like those old Abbott and 
Costello movies back Earthside: the wall had a hidden door. I even tripped 
going through the blasted thing. In my mind a laugh track played and 
played and played. 

I fell into a new corridor, which I followed to a rising wall at the south 
end of the hall. There was another of those crazy platforms near at hand. 
Instinct told me to give it a wide berth, and who am I to argue with my most 
cherished faculty? When I reached the wall, I found another switch, which I 
flipped. 

The wall shooooshed up, revealing a down staircase; it was an 
encouraging sign—the nuke plant was down another level or two, I vaguely 
remembered. Cautiously, I started down the stairs, grateful for steady light. 


My reward was the biggest slime pool yet, waiting at the bottom. If only I’d 
remembered to bring swimming trunks, I could have gone in for a dip. Best 
toxic sludge in the whole solar system right here—come one, come all. 

Skirting the pool, pressed against the wall, I finally ran out of hangar. 
Along the narrow corridor past the toxin, I found the shredded body of 
another one of those brown-leather, spiky demons. If it were a talker, 
someone had already silenced it forever with seven or eight rounds from a 
Sig-Cow. Score another for the Corps. 

The bug lay against a sliding door that belonged on a dumbwaiter. I 
yanked it open, happy to take out my frustrations on something that didn’t 
shoot, claw, or flame me back. 

Sure enough, it was a lift, barely big enough for a big guy to squeeze 
into. I spotted a funny mark on the wall, as if someone had started to draw a 
map using a bright, red paint stick—we use them to blaze trails in forests or 
urban environments. Whoever it was had been interrupted in mid-map. I 
studied it for a bit, then shrugged; whatever he was trying to tell me got lost 
in the translation. 

I scrunched inside the tiny lift, wondering which of the two buttons 
would take me down to the plant. Staring at the labels, I decided to push the 
one marked “Nuclear Plant.” And they say you don’t get an education in the 
service! 

With a jerk, the tiny lift sank, swerving and rattling all the way, as much 
as screaming out Here I come! to the whole world. Well, to the whole 
Phobos pressure zone, I guess. 

I didn’t have to guess whether this important part of the base had fallen 
into enemy hands. The minute I stepped off the platform, I was in the soup 
up to my neck. This particular recipe called for more zombies than I 
thought could be crammed into such a small space. Come to think of it, the 
space wasn’t all that small. I guess when it’s wall-to-wall corpse-sickles, it’s 
easy to lose track of the finer points of design. 

For the first time in my life I felt what it was like to be claustrophobic 
from being surrounded by walls of human flesh—well, formerly human 
flesh. I couldn’t understand why I wasn’t dead meat. 

Two things worked in my favor: first, so many zombies were sardine- 
canned in the room, they could hardly move, and most of them didn’t even 
know I was there. Second, it had become clear to me by now that the only 


use for brains in a zombie was for gray and white color contrast when you 
blasted their heads like rotten fruit. Even Gunny Used-to-Be-Goforth had 
been operating on motor reflexes, and he was the most dangerous one yet. 

There was plenty of time to think about such things because there was 
really nowhere for me to go, and I was waiting for one of them to notice 
me. Then one of those wonderful moments of dumb luck added the final 
spice to the soup. Another contingent of zombies trooped into storage, and 
one of the shambling creeps elbowed aside another, simply trying to find 
somewhere to stand. In the tiny, new space created, I noticed an undamaged 
map on the wall! 

By this time, I’d arrived at the conclusion that zombies were not 
responsible for the destroyed radio equipment, the vandalized maps, the 
deliberately wasted weapons. The advantage of attending my first zombie 
convention was that there apparently wasn’t room for the demon monsters 
to get in here and do their damage; the space was being used for zombie 
storage. 

Trying to look dead on my feet—not difficult—I shambled a few meters 
to where I could get a better view of the map—it was a full schematic of the 
entire station seen from the side. Unfortunately, it didn’t include overhead 
views for each level; but at least I could see how far down the station went. 
My God, it even had a You Are Here arrow! 

I was indeed at the nuclear plant level; above me was the hangar, while 
still below were the Toxin Refinery—didn’t that sound appetizing— 
Command & Control, the labs, Central Processing, and MIS. Jesus . . . only 
six more levels to clear; I was afraid it would be thirty! 

Funny how what I was seeing triggered memories of malls and shoppers. 
Best not to dwell on that... 

Somewhere in the back of my head a shrill voice screamed for me to get 
the hell out of that room. I figured this situation was too lucky to last. 

Without false modesty, I can say I was proven a prophet. In that sea of 
pale, dead faces, two dry as dust eyes came to rest on Yours Truly. Hoping 
the unfocused eyes would continue their survey of the room, I didn’t move a 
muscle . . . which was normally what the zombies did when they had no 
orders and had not spotted a human: they stood and did nothing. 

Except, that is, for the one who wouldn’t stop staring at me. I wasn’t 
about to make the first move. I’d been through a lot lately but I could still 


count. 

It seemed like this could go on forever; but then, out of nowhere, a 
zombie-child separated itself from the rest of the throng and stumbled 
toward me. 

Jesus! For a second I didn’t recognize that she was as dead as the rest. 
Seeing plenty of zombies recruited from soldiers made it easy to forget the 
UAC civilians that had been on this base. But somehow I’d never dreamed 
there would be children here. 

The kid headed straight for me, mouth opening and closing but no 
sounds coming out. Then those soft, wet, cold hands were rubbing on my 
arm ... and I couldn’t stifle my reflexes. I put my arm around her to 
comfort her. 

All hell broke loose. 

Staring-boy opened his mouth, too; but instead of words, he belched an 
inarticulate roar. But he was so hemmed in by his fellows, he couldn’t raise 
the pistol in his right hand. Impatient guy that I am, I acted: I tilted up my 
shotgun and squeezed the trigger. 

A dead-center blast helped a lot. I pumped the slide, then pounded home 
another shot to clear a path. 

Then I was running as fast and hard as I could to the left. In close 
quarters like this there was no opportunity to use the rifle. My best bet was 
to find elbow room where I could at least make a stand but that wouldn’t put 
me in a cul de sac. The sounds pounding in my ears told me that they were 
following me, but I wasn’t about to turn around and take a head count. 

I ducked into an open doorway, then turned like Custer at bay. Three of 
the creatures shambled past, not even noticing me—the fourth was not so 
obligingly stupid. It pushed through the doorway, and I raised the shotgun. 

Just before I turned that face into an explosion of red, something about it 
reminded me of my grandfather. I wish that hadn’t happened. I was doing 
all right until then. 

The trouble was that every time I made careful calculations about what I 
could do in terms of stamina, willpower, and even strategy, the old emotions 
got completely away from me. I’d thought I was a better Marine than this. 
Then again, they’d never trained us for a nonstop horror show. 

I needed a break. I needed to lie down for five minutes because my lower 
back was killing me and there was a muscle spasm in my right shoulder 


blade. A nice cold drink of water would have gone a long way toward 
cooling the fire in my brain. But seeing old Granddad’s face on the 
umpteenth zombie was the latest straw breaking the latest camel’s back. 

I couldn’t shoot. I just couldn’t! I grabbed it by its coveralls and shoved 
it backward with superhuman, adrenaline strength. 

It bowled over some of its buddies; then one in the back rank raised a 
lever-action rifle and tried to blow my fool head off. 

I slapped the deck face first, and the bullet scorched the air, blowing 
apart one of the zombies that had missed the turnoff a few seconds back, 
splattering the other two with what passes for zombie brains. 

The creatures went mad. That shot must have kicked their IFF off-line, 
because they opened up on their zombie brethren, who cheerfully returned 
fire. In seconds, every zombie was shooting wildly at anything that moved! 

I stayed very, very still, frozen on the ground, trying as hard as I could to 
look like a “dead” zombie. 


9 


When the ammo finally ran dry, the jerking bodies above me 
started tearing each other limb from limb, as if auditioning for modern 
ballet. I seized the opportunity to roll out from under the forest of legs; the 
rifle was strapped to my back, but in the chaos of the moment, I left the 
shotgun behind. 

I ran, and this time I wasn’t followed. After thirty heart-pounding 
seconds, I was alone with me, myself, and I. And somewhere along the 
route, I had stooped and grabbed a pack, one of Fox Company’s—but I had 
no memory of having done so! 

I was utterly lost. I silently cursed at being reduced to the Sig-Cow and 
wandered more or less aimlessly . . . terrified of shadows, where half an 
hour ago I stalked with confidence. With just a pistol and a semi-auto rifle, I 
avoided confrontation wherever I could. 

With no map, I wasn’t sure what part of the plant I had reached; then I 
pushed through another of those trick doors—I would have missed it had I 
not been sliding along the walls like a mouse—and found the computer 
room. The lights were blinking on and off, just what I needed for a 
headache after everything else. When the light was on, it had a sickly blue- 
green color that didn’t do my empty stomach any good. 

So far as I could tell, I was alone here, at least in this section. I wasn’t 
happy about the way the corridor went up a little ways and disappeared 
around a bend. I decided then and there if I ever try to be an architect, all 
my buildings would borrow from my old high school gymnasium—a big, 
empty space where you can’t possible hide anything. May not be much in 
the way of privacy, but there are advantages all right. 

Placing my back firmly against a wall, I took inventory of the contents of 
my new pack. First thing that jumped out at me was ammo for the missing 
shotgun. I was going to have to replace that as soon as possible. Dude 


Dardier would have wanted it that way. I had some 10mm rounds for the 
Sig-Cow that also fit the pistol, a bit of water or other liquid, chewing 
gum... andasmall, little metal object that appeared to be a shiny flashlight 
battery. I had no idea what the last was; the UAC logo was printed on the 
side, not the globe and eagle of the Corps emblem. 

First order of business was checking the liquid. I was worried it might be 
vodka or gin or rubbing alcohol or something other than what I wanted it 
most to be. But at long last I was in for a bit of good luck: it was water. 
While I took a first grateful sip, repressing the desire to finish it off with one 
gulp, I picked up the batterylike object with my other hand. Then I realized 
what it was. I’d heard about, but never seen, a rocket this small. 

Correction: I had seen one in a UAC weapons demo video when they 
were trying to sell it to the Pentagon. (We didn’t buy it—I wish we had!) 
Yeah, these were special little babies, all right. But no one from Fox 
Company had been carrying any rocket launchers. This kind of ordnance 
was for desert fighting. Where had this rocket come from? 

I laughed out loud. Not smart in this situation, but it was becoming a bad 
habit. If evil demons could be lurking anywhere, and the walls and floors 
were metamorphosing into Halloween decorations, why couldn’t there be a 
state-of-the-art tac rocket in a forgotten backpack? Maybe Id find a 
tomahawk next. 

At least ’'d stopped laughing. The rational part of my brain was trying to 
figure out where I might find a rocket launcher. Made sense. I was trying 
real hard to listen to the little voice that made sense. Only trouble was that a 
much louder voice was roaring from somewhere lower in the brain. It 
wanted me to find the rocket launcher, too, but for a less defensible reason. 

I guess ’'d been more upset by the roomful of zombies than I’d realized 
—or maybe I’d been this freaked-out all along, and was only now realizing 
it. My God, did I really want to find that missing launcher just so I could eat 
a rocket? 

Suicide isn’t in my nature. I’m an extrovert type, more likely to frag 
someone, say a certain butthead lieutenant, than snuff Yours Truly. That’s 
sort of a job requirement for the Marines. The battlefield doesn’t cure 
depression. 

But the tac-sit here on Phobos was a lot worse than a battlefield. Having 
to go through the same crap over and over is just part of life. I know guys 


who have been married. 

But what had happened on Phobos was so far beyond normal repetition 
that it turned me totally cold and numb. If I could just find one living 
person! That thing had said . . . had implied that someone still lived. Jesus, 
if there’s such a thing as the soul, then mine had been beaten black and 
blue. 

Maybe I wasn’t being completely honest with myself. I could have killed 
myself with the rifle. There are other ways, too, God bless our training. 
Waiting for the launcher could have been just a good excuse for postponing 
the inevitable. Maybe. Or maybe if I found the launcher, I really would put 
the tube in my mouth and, as they say, “fire and forget.” 

Fortunately, I never had to make that decision. I found something else 
instead. 

I stood in a long, steel corridor that curved off to the right; the only light 
came from a bluish, fluorescent tube that curved along the left wall and a 
sporadic white overhead spot. I crept as near as possible to one of those 
white-light areas . . . somehow I felt better surrounded by more natural 
colors, even though it made me more of a target. 

Then I glanced to my left and saw it. 

I didn’t trust my eyes at first. They hadn’t been doing much to encourage 
trust lately. But if what I was seeing was real, then I wouldn’t be fooling 
around with any more self-destructive fantasies. 

Directly in front of my nose, scrawled with the same red paint stick that 
had started drawing a map in the dumbwaiter, were two capital letters: A.S. 
An arrow was drawn by the same dye marker, pointing to the right at a 
downward angle. 

I stared at the mark, memory working furiously. Two years back I had 
gone to see the old James Mason movie, Journey to the Center of the Earth. 
I didn’t know who Jules Verne was—but Arlene had insisted. She loved sci- 
fi of any type. 

We made a big event out of it. We had just come off a three-month stint 
in Peru, torching coca-leaf fields so they’d never be processed into cocaine, 
and we were ready for an old-movie orgy. We didn’t usually eat junk, but 
for this special occasion, we gorged on the unhealthiest popcorn we could 
buy, even including black market liquid grease-butter. I can honestly say 
that I have never enjoyed a trip to the movies so much. 


In the movie, Arne Saknussem, world’s greatest adventurer, was the first 
to explore the secrets of Earth’s inner world; he leaves his initials marked in 
candle soot at different levels, so anyone coming afterward can follow his 
route. The arrows point out the path he took when the caverns branched off. 

I stared at the mark. A.S.—Arne Saknussen; A.S.... Arlene Sanders. 

My gut dropped to my boots. Arlene! Arlene was alive? It had to be... 
what other explanation was there? She was alive . . . and she was doing just 
what I was doing: going deeper into the station, hoping to find a radio or 
another living human, or maybe her old pal, Fly. She was drilling deeper 
into this hell, hoping to find a way out! 

There was no doubt in my mind: A.S. meant my bud was still alive . . . or 
at least, she’d been alive up to that point, alive and still herself. She must 
have survived the firefight that killed her platoon. 

All thoughts of self-destruction were wiped away in an instant. I felt 
supercharged. For the first time since stepping foot on this damned space 
rock, I was happy! I moved forward, military discipline reasserting itself, 
putting some breaks on the warrior who would still be needed for the killing 
time. 

Following the arrow led directly to an exit to a patio. I took it. As always 
when entering a new locale, I braced for a potential zombie attack or 
another encounter with the monsters. But now I had a new objective: to find 
Arlene—and for that, I had to find a new shotgun. Neither waited for me on 
the patio; something brand new was there instead. 

This one took the cake, and it was nobody’s birthday. Picture a perfectly 
round sphere floating in the air. No strings attached here. A blue sphere, as 
pure a blue as a perfect spring day back home, with one extra touch: there 
was a face on this ball. I didn’t have very long to appreciate how butt-ugly 
the mug was because no sooner had I registered all this in the brain 
department than the sphere rushed me and smashed into my head before I 
could even twitch, bursting all over Yours Truly. 

I figured I'd had it. For a moment I couldn’t breathe with that weird glop 
all over me, running down the length of my body, reaching the floor so I 
could conveniently take a header, which I did. My first thought was poison! 
I could still breathe, though, once my mouth and nose cleared. 

With the first swallow, I felt something cold and invigorating rush 
through my body. Taking a deep breath, the air seemed cleaner and tasted 


better. 

Suddenly, I felt great. If this turned out to be a strange symptom of the 
alien poison, I could recommend it. Special Endorsements available from 
Flynn Taggart’s coffin . . . reasonable rates. Sitting up, I expected an attack 
of dizziness; but it never came. The liquid had mostly evaporated by now or 
maybe absorbed into my body. 

With another deep breath—which felt better than ever—I stood up. I 
hadn’t been poisoned—just the opposite, in fact. This crazy floating sphere 
had been good for me! It was perfectly reasonable to assume that any weird 
creature coming through one of the Gates would be bad, and worse, deadly 
to all things human. Discovering that lovely A.S. had been the most 
pleasant surprise of the day (yeah, I know day and night are pretty tricky 
concepts when you’re stranded on a space rock the size of an average-sized 
garbage dump); but the second piece of good news was how this blue 
sphere had just made me feel like a billion dollars. 

Now that I was feeling like a new man, I was more dedicated than ever to 
the proposition of finding Arlene and exiting the nuclear plant. Easier said; 
Arlene’s arrow pointed me to the blue sphere—but was that all? Maybe I 
should follow the arrow down the computer-room corridor, I thought, and 
forget the door leading to the patio. Then again, maybe she didn’t even see 
the hidden door, and I just stumbled through it, misreading her arrow. 

I returned to the computer room and headed in the direction of Arlene’s 
arrow. After twenty minutes of winding through the maze, I ended up right 
back at the arrow again! “Well, that was a real brainstorm,’ I grumbled. 

I decided to leave a small mark of my own, a simple F, next to her 
initials whenever I found them. This would prevent my mistaking one mark 
for the next—and anyone else, Arlene or maybe the “Ron” twins, who came 
this way again would know he was not alone. 

I followed her mark again, this time picking a different route; and at last 
I made eye contact with some company, however unwelcome. One of the 
familiar brown monsters with the painful, white spikes was eating 
something, its back to me. 

Up to now Id been spared seeing them eat. It sat on a table, hunched 
over, making hard, crunching noises. I caught a glimpse of something red in 
its jaws as it turned its head to the side; fortunately, it didn’t check its six. 


If ’'d found another shotgun by now, I would have blasted the blasphemy 
from behind . . . but sometimes frustration is the father of fortune, for 
suddenly I heard a whole bunch of the bastards walking right past me—on 
the other side of the thin, computer-maze wall. 

If I had followed my gut instincts and shot the demonic son of a bitch, I 
would have been ambushed. Shaking from a retroactive adrenaline rush, I 
silently told myself that my objectives were to find Arlene and get the hell 
out of here, off Phobos, and find a radio somewhere! 

Then a thought hit me like a ton of slag. Arlene wouldn’t bother taking 
time in this hellhole to scribble her mark unless she had a damned good 
reason. Not just to point out the sphere—if she knew it was there, she’d 
have used it herself like a good soldier. 

The only logical conclusion was that the arrow pointed the way out of 
the nuclear plant—the way Arlene Sanders had already gone. Like Arne 
Saknussen, she marked her own trail for all who followed. 

So why hadn’t I found it? Same way Arlene missed the patio door: there 
had to be another hidden door nearby that J had missed. 

Third time’s the charm. The damned door couldn’t have been more than 
five feet from the one I had found. One good push and it was open, leading 
to a beautiful piece of straight, well-lit corridor that reached its end with a 
clean, massive metal door that had printed on it the welcome letters ExIT— 
obviously a holdover from the plant’s mundane days as a hangout for 
humans. Feeling bold and unstoppable, I walked right up to that door and 
discovered that it required a computer key card before it would bless the 
lonely traveler with an open sesame. 

Great. Now I could be miserable again. 


10 


Something I'd learned at age fourteen: when your mind is 
working, don’t give it a reason to stop. I’d reasoned it out this far, fitting 
pieces into place. Why should I be stopped by one minor impediment? 

When you welcome thoughts, they come. There had been something 
wrong about the sound of the crunching from the monster that was eating. 
At first I was certain it was chowing down on the remains of one of my 
comrades; but now I realized the sound was all wrong, too high, too sharp. 
And when I saw the color code on the ExIr door—bright red—I acted on 
my hunch. 

I didn’t want to run into any more of those monsters, so I took it nice and 
easy getting back to the one having its Happy Meal; with that troop 
trooping around somewhere, silence was definitely golden. My main 
concern was that he might be gone. I needn’t have worried. 

Now I know why God invented bayonets. 

The thing died gurgling without a scream, a roar, or a gunshot to call 
monsters from the vasty deep. I missed my chance to find out if I had 
another intellectual demon. 

Flipping it on its back, I saw something red in its mouth—a clear, red, 
plastic computer key card on which it had been chewing. Next to it was a 
pile of plastic cards, mangled beyond repair, small red and blue globs 
suggesting the remains of more key cards. Fortunately, the one I carefully 
fished out of its mouth was still in one piece. 

The red card worked; the exit door slid open, revealing an access ladder. 
I climbed down as quietly as I could . . . but I still hadn’t found a new 
shotgun. 

The toxin refinery; such a lovely name. The dump was another step 
down, in more ways than one. At first it seemed as though I'd entered a 
zone of peace and tranquility. Greeting me was a wide-open space lit by a 


sun lamp so bright that for a moment I thought I was back on Earth in the 
middle of a pleasant afternoon. The abundance of weird-looking machinery 
raised my suspicions, however; I could easily imagine monsters and 
zombies lurking behind equipment of that size. 

As I began to explore the area, I was grateful for the first sight of a barrel 
full of the toxic sludge. I'd certainly changed my mind about green slime! 
Now that I knew the stuff was as explosive as nitro, finding it was like 
coming across another weapon. 

I searched frantically for another mark by Arlene. I remembered another 
afternoon we spent at the rec-hall flicks. We watched one of those mad 
scientist movies, and the laboratory was stuffed with more switches and 
levers than humanly possible. The more I checked out the toxin refinery, the 
more it seemed like that make-believe lab. 

Not all the switches had to be activated by hand, either. I made that 
discovery when I walked past a green section of wall, the color of a ripe 
avocado. The immediate whirring sound had me spinning around and ready 
for action. But nothing was coming to get me this time. The motion detector 
I had just activated stimulated my memory. CNET used to show us training 
videos, and I remembered that Union Aerospace used movable architecture 
to transport the liquid metals extracted from Phobos ore. 

I watched the corridor behind me slowly shift out of sight; it sure beat 
the hell out of coming into a room and finding stone and metal that had 
grown scales or pulsing veins. No horror faces here! The bad part was that 
as the physical layout changed, the corridors would realign; the route in was 
no longer the route out. 

With so many hidden triggers, I never knew when I was going to shift 
everything all over again. Stepping on a land mine would be a lot worse; but 
this situation was still unpredictable enough to be a major pain in the ass. I 
tried avoiding the sensor eyes, but they were too well hidden. Once a 
motion detector activated, I couldn’t undo it; I had to love it or lump it. 

When I tossed out the old religious baggage, I thought my superstitions 
had gone with it. Well, Phobos might not drag me back where the nuns 
wanted me, but it did reintroduce me to every superstition I ever had as a 
kid. 

So the first thought that leapt to mind when something cold brushed my 
face was Ghosts! Peripheral vision warned me something was definitely 


there; but when I turned to face it, all I saw was a blur. 

I was still debating when something big and fast knocked me on my ass. 
I still couldn’t see it, but I figured any ghost that can knock you down is a 
ghost you can return the favor to. 

Jesus and Mary, did I miss that shotgun now! The wide blast dispersion 
was tailor-made for shooting something you can’t see. But if the rifle was 
all I had, the rifle was what I’d use. I was a Marine, damn it—and every 
Marine is a rifleman first. 

Scrambling back from where I’d been attacked, I readied my Sig-Cow, 
aimed at nothing in particular, and waited for the first blurring of vision that 
meant either I was having a stroke or I’d found a new kind of monster. 

The wall in front of me went a little watery, like something insubstantial 
was in front of it. Without staring and losing it, I fired four quick taps. 

I expected to draw blood; I didn’t expect an explosion. The ghost 
screamed and seemed to collapse; I wasn’t sure. Then something hot and 
heavy pounded me from behind, and I finally tigged what had really 
happened: more damned fireballers! The first shot had missed me and killed 
my “ghost.” 

I whirled around, diving sideways; two spikys, two zombies, one big 
barrel of sludge. Ignoring the monsters, I concentrated fire on the stationary 
barrel. It took a couple of rounds then exploded spectacularly. 

I wondered if my “intellectual” demon could spell KA-BOOM? 

I approached cautiously and examined the remains. At least the aliens’ 
blood was red and the internal organs bore a strong resemblance to human 
plumbing. Just beyond the primary gore site I noticed another tangle of 
human arms and legs. 

Catching my breath, I went closer. It was a relief when I saw the bits and 
pieces were from zombies; for a moment, I’d been worried. 

It was Christmas when I saw the riot gun clutched in one severed 
hand . . . but it was Valentine’s day, hearts and flowers, when I spotted the 
missing rocket launcher! 

The shotgun was a little fancier than the last riot gun, a more old- 
fashioned model. It took the same twelve-gauge, but it also had a muzzle 
device so you could adjust the pattern spread for close work or far. 

I allowed myself to feel real gratitude for the zombies, who were turning 
out to be my best pals. If not for them, I wouldn’t have a single functional 


weapon. Even when the aliens deliberately destroyed radios, maps, and 
anything else decorative or useful, they had to keep their zombies armed. 
We don’t come equipped with claws or armor plate. At least, not we guys. 

Looking around, I was disappointed there was no one else to shoot. 
Then, as if receiving a good grade for a job well done, I spotted the glimmer 
of another A.S. on a distant wall. 

I ran to look. It was! Arlene had come through again. Once again the 
arrow showed me where to go, and I wasn’t complaining. It seemed like she 
had an uncanny knack for shadowing the demons until she found the way 
down. 

Clipping the rocket launcher to my webbing gave me an odd feeling. I 
had thought to use it to frag myself; but Arlene and her Magic Markers 
changed that plan. 

The rocket launcher was serious firepower. This one looked in good 
shape, but it didn’t have the two preloaded rockets that were standard issue. 
I was going to have to make my one rocket round count. I loaded up then let 
it dangle. 

Armed for very big bear, I followed Arlene’s arrow through a narrow 
opening; I could barely squeeze past. The UAC designers evidently did not 
have big men wearing combat armor in mind when they built the “Manual 
Vertilift Bypass Route.” 

The doorway led to a spiral escalator down. It was not operating, so I 
crept down as silently as possible . . . not very. 

The escalator led down to the Command Control level, as I recalled from 
the map I had seen above. C&C was the nerve center; if there were any 
working radios in the facility, that’s where I expected to find them. 

Once there, I wondered if it had been worth the trip. The architecture of 
this place was the most depressing yet, heavy, gray, very much in the style 
of military garrisons from World War II. I had to wonder why any human 
would build thick, fortified walls deep inside Phobos—if a human had. 
Maybe we inherited this, too. 

Making my way down the longest corridors I had seen yet, I was struck 
by the grotesque combination of black moments from human history with 
the inhuman qualities of the invader. A heavy whiff of diesel fumes had me 
coughing so badly I had to stop and catch my breath. Diesel fumes? That 
couldn’t be right. But that’s what I had smelled. 


My footsteps echoed so loudly, they sounded like mortars. I was glad 
when I reached the first open space, if only because the echoes wouldn’t be 
deafening. The kind of stone forming the floor changed, and the higher 
ceiling gave the sound somewhere to go. 

I was at the edge of a huge room, shrouded in darkness except for a 
couple of shafts of bright light shining through glass skylights. I don’t know 
whether there were spots behind the glass or whether I was seeing actual 
daylight; but the squares of brilliance lit up two spots as bright as freeway 
construction sites. 

One of the two bright-lit squares contained a table; on top of the table 
was an AB-10 machine pistol. God, did I want that pistol! I could almost 
taste it. I stared from the doorway, trying to estimate the odds that the pistol 
was bait for a trap; I kept getting an unacceptably high probability. 

Turning in the opposite direction, I crept along the wall, rolling each 
step, just as they’d taught us in SERE School and SurvInfil. Every few steps 
I stopped abruptly, listening for someone shadowing my footsteps. 

I tracked the wall to the left, followed it for a right turn, and finally 
approached a hulking machine of some sort that almost touched the wall, 
leaving a slight gap. I slid through the gap as silently as I could and poked 
my head out. 

What I saw made me smile grimly. Behind a pile of boxes, ten feet past 
the machine pistol, were no fewer than a dozen of those brown spinys who 
would never make Smokey the Bear’s Christmas list. They were hiding 
behind the boxes, staring greedily at the well-lit gun and waiting for 
someone stupid enough to march up and try to grab it. 

Allow me to introduce myself... 

I let my new shotgun dangle, shouldering the minirocket-launcher 
instead. I only had one round, and I had never fired one of those things 
before; my first shot would have to be a damned good one. 

I closed my eyes and visualized the UAC sales video: raise range finder; 
grab plastic propellant tag and pull—which mixes the volatiles and 
incidentally engages the primer firing pin; thumb-off safety; aim and 
squeeze trigger. Pulling the trigger halfway produced a tiny, red laser dot; I 
lovingly moved it across to sit directly on the rump of the biggest demon. 

One of the other demons noticed the spot and reached out to touch it. I 
squeezed the trigger the rest of the way. 


The rocket exploded with a bang so loud, I thought I would be 
permanently deaf. While my ears still rang, I dropped the rocket-launcher 
and retrieved my scattergun. 

I humped toward the remains of the ambush crew; there were a few 
survivors, crawling along the ground looking for their legs and arms. I put 
them out of my misery. 

I counted thirteen heads and fourteen left arms, so I must have slipped a 
digit somewhere. Shotgun in hand, I slowly approached the AB-10, alert for 
a second line of attack. 

I was still seven meters away when I heard the sound, and it was a bad 
one; the worst one yet .. . a low, piglike growl, a snuffling sound turning 
into a wet, animalistic grunt. I froze, the image of a giant boar filling my 
mind. Slowly, I backed away from the AB-10. I did not want to meet 
whatever made that noise. 


11 


Damn! 1 thought, furious that even after expending my only 
rocket, I couldn’t get the machine pistol; I was right back where I started, 
except one rocket lighter. I had squandered my gift! I felt like the guy who 
found a lamp that would grant one wish, and he says, “Jeez, I wish I knew 
what to wish for.” 

I moved on, warier than before. The simplicity of the layout and the big 
blocks of stone made secret doors less likely here, although I would pause 
occasionally and try pushing against anything that looked remotely 
promising. The fact that the alien monsters had set a trap worried me; as I 
went deeper into the base, it seemed like they were getting smarter. 

I was becoming concerned that I hadn’t found any more messages from 
Arlene. Was I still following her trail, or did I take a wrong turn? 

Through a doorway arch, I found another room with a light blue motif. 
The UAC logo was repeated regularly, over and over, in the floor; evidently, 
I was back in original, human architecture. 

The room contained a number of kiosks, four that I could see. As I 
neared the center kiosk I must have triggered another of those motion 
detector switches. All the doors began to rise as one. A filth of aliens 
tumbled out, and this time I had no rocket and no convenient barrels of 
toxin. 

I fired a quick shell, dropping one; then the rest fell on me like ravenous 
in-laws. I dropped the shotgun to the ground and barely managed to swing 
my semi-auto Sig-Cow up to take the shock as the first alien hit me. 

The damned thing impaled itself on my bayonet—but it was too stupid to 
die! It clawed forward, stopped only by the bayonet hilt, and grabbed my 
padded shoulders with death-grip talons, dragging me back against the wall. 

Saved my hide, it did. The alien’s broad back shielded me as its brethren 
flung their fiery, mucus wads; the fireballs burst, spraying flaming, red 


liquid that dribbled down my dance partner’s legs to pool on the ground, 
lighting the room with a hellish, red glaze. I fired nine or ten times, finally 
blowing a hole clean through the alien . . . a gory loophole through which I 
turned on the rest. 

I guess they refused to believe that the firewads weren’t frying me; they 
stubbornly kept throwing them, ignoring the burning pool around the feet of 
the first, dead monster. I got lucky; two of the aliens jostled, then turned on 
each other, fang and claw. The weakened survivor fell to a single shot from 
my Sig-Cow ... abruptly, I realized I was alone with two hundred kilos of 
alien brochette on my bayonet. What a life! 

Evidently, I had not met all my playmates yet. I decided I liked it that 
way. 

The room had a central kiosk, which I entered. There was a blue security 
card in there. I grabbed it on the chance I’d find a use for it. Then it was 
back to the search for signs of Arlene. 

Edging up a shallow set of steps, I finally found Arlene’s next A.S. and 
arrow. Grinning, I followed her trail through a room stuffed with computers. 
Most of these centers had the same basic floor plan; but I was absolutely, 
one hundred percent unprepared to encounter a freaking swastika! Some 
sick joker had arranged eight Cray 9000s to form the “crooked cross” that a 
certain Austrian corporal had appropriated in the middle of last century. 
Maybe it was a coincidence, but I doubt it. 

This was all getting a little too weird for me. The River Styx, zombies, 
demons, flaming skulls . . . what kind of intelligence was behind this? 
Whatever it meant, I decided not to think about it. 

I could easily have gone through the computer room without noticing, 
but an undamaged map to the section made it impossible to ignore the 
swastika floor plan. My adventure with the kiosk had been dead center in 
the largest circle. Above it and slightly to the left was the swastika of the 
computer room. Walking through, one might figure it out. At certain angles 
one couldn’t help but recognize that the bloodred design of the floor had a 
certain association. The map was like a slap in the face. 

It barely bothered me when I triggered another of those damned motion 
detectors. They were becoming routine by now. Of course, there was always 
some element of surprise. In this case, the swastika-crays lowered into the 
floor, real slow with a grinding sound like the bones of a million dead being 


rendered to powder, and I expected to see soul-shattering horror. Instead, I 
won another jackpot. 

I’d just found two boxes of rockets, five to a box. And I found a yellow 
security card with a note that if I were trying to find the card where it was 
supposed to be, north of the “maze” at the northwest corner of the 
installation (maze? talk about feeling like a trapped rat), well, I wouldn’t 
find it there because it was here instead. Safe and sound with the rockets. 
The note was signed A.S.! 

Man, I was going to have a lot of questions for that girl when I found 
her. It was hard enough staying alive without going to a lot of trouble for a 
hypothetical fellow soldier, who on a wild off-chance might still be 
breathing and putting one foot in front of the other. She had performed 
incredible feats here. As Arlene found supplies along the way—everything 
from weapons and ammo to these ugly key cards—she took only what she 
could carry and stowed the rest where a thinking man might find it. 

Anyway, the least I could do under the circumstances was load the 
battery-sized rockets into my pack (aside from the two I loaded into the 
launcher), pocket the yellow card next to the blue one, and blow this horror 
show. 

I ran into one minor obstacle along the way. I should say I avoided it; I 
was just about to barge through a flimsy, narrow door, en route to the exit 
from Command Control, following Arlene’s latest arrow, when I heard the 
horrible pig sound to which I’d taken an instant hatred. This time it was 
accompanied by heavy footfalls suggesting tons of flesh waddling 
ponderously in the artificial gravity of the base. These pig noises were 
sloppier, wetter, deeper than before. 

Part of me wanted to kick in that door and face the creature; part of me 
had had enough. I had rockets; from the sound, this pig thing was made of 
flesh and blood—plenty of both to spare. 

The rational part of me said I’d probably find out sooner rather than later 
whether I could kill this new monster or not. Why race it to the grave? 

While I was having this debate with myself, the pig thing thumped- 
thumped on past the door. I waited a few more breathless minutes, then 
opened the door a crack and listened. Nothing. 

But the instant my book crossed the threshold, I heard a warning grunt 
from my right, down the black-dark hallway, followed by a heavy, meaty 


tread accelerating toward me like a main battle tank. 

I could barely make out a bulky shape shambling out of the night to 
starboard; but directly in front of my nose was a heavy, armored door, a 
pressure hatch, rimmed with blue lights. I bolted across the corridor, 
jamming my hand in my pocket and fishing out both key cards. 

The first one I tried turned out to be yellow. The door buzzed angrily, and 
I began to smell the rotten stench of corruption that comes from animals 
that chow-down on decayed carrion. 

Swallowing panic, I yanked out the yellow and inserted the blue. The 
door chimed and ponderously rolled up; I darted through, unslung my 
scattergun, and waited, shaking, for the Thing Without a Name. 

The heavy security door rolled shut, mocking me with its lethargy. 
Fortune loved me this time; slow as the door was, the nightmare was just 
that much slower. The door shut, and the frustrated pig-thing beat on the 
heavy metal and howled its rage and hunger. 

And still | hadn’t seen even one of the things in the light. 

Knees weak, I followed a trail of three marks and three arrows to the 
next door—which wanted the yellow card, surprisingly enough. This door 
led to a lift that wasn’t working, naturally; but the open shaft had guide 
cables along the sides, and that was good enough for the human Fly. I slid 
down almost fifty meters before finding another open lift door. 

I swung through the hatch and saw the level-schematic on the wall; 
Welcome to Phobos Laboratories. 

Five minutes in the Phobos lab convinced me that Command Control 
hadn’t been all that bad. It didn’t escape me that every time I went to a new 
center, it was a level farther down than the previous one. Living conditions 
were not improving, not by a long shot. However, none of that really 
mattered. If Arlene had come this way, then so would I. I had to find her; I 
had to find any other human survivors. 

All of this made a lot of sense to me intellectually. Emotionally, I was 
willing to jettison honor, duty, and loyalty and run like a thief as I 
contemplated my first real swim in the toxic goo. Semper fi, Mac, 

I'd talked myself into wading through the toxin way up above, and the 
protective boots that were part of the armor sizzled like bacon on the 
griddle. But the material was plenty thick, and the corrosive liquid hadn’t 


reached my tender flesh yet. And like last time, there was no way around 
the horrible stuff. 

Got to be some way to avoid full body immersion, I thought. But without 
a heavy-duty flashlight that I didn’t have and wouldn’t dare show if I did, 
damned if I could find it. 

Arlene’s arrow pointed across the pool. Grudgingly, I had to admit there 
was no way to proceed without a little swim. 

I was damned glad for the edge that blue face-sphere had given me when 
it exploded all over me, making me feel healthier than I have in years. If 
ever I needed that edge, it was now. 

I took a deep breath. Then I took a few more. Man, I did not want to do 
this! But it was the only way to get past a wall that blocked me from going 
any farther along the trail Arlene blazed; I had to go under the damned 
thing. Thinking of how much I hated monsters from beyond the stars, I 
splashed down. 

Only one advantage over before: this time, I was prepared for the 
freezing pain, so it wasn’t quite as unexpectedly horrible. Just a throbbing 
ache that sapped my strength, leaving me enervated and gasping for breath. 
One way or the other, the swim wasn’t going to last very long. The toxin 
glowed with an eerie, green phosphorescence, and the light helped a little. It 
showed me a metallic object that I would have missed otherwise. 

I snagged it in passing, a small, hand-sized television thing, showing a 
ghostly schematic. 

If I struggled, I could pretend the liquid was nothing but an algae- 
infested swimming hole I’d haunted as a kid. Yes, I wanted to think about 
water instead of the thick, toxic crap I was in right now. 

The wall did not extend all the way to the bottom of the pool. I pinched 
my nose, squeezed my eyelids tight, and ducked underneath. I was starting 
to tremble in the icy liquid; I felt sick, like a monster flu. 

Then I surfaced as fast as the law of buoyancy allows, grabbing the 
opposite catwalk, and the swim was over. Air never tasted better, even the 
stinking stuff in this place. Two or three breaths later, I put the breathing 
filter back in place. Too bad I hadn’t had a full environment suit with its 
own oxygen supply, but I'd already regretted that absence before and 
nothing came of it. A Marine couldn’t have everything. 


For example, I couldn’t keep the blue glow forever. I had taken it for 
granted until I realized what this swim could mean. Now I felt sapped and 
drained. I was all set to curse my lousy luck until I realized something very 
important: without that earlier boost to my system, this dunk in the sludge 
would have killed me. 

So what about Arlene? Could she have come this way? Could I have 
passed her body in the green murk? Had to think this through—there was 
no arrow immediately beyond the toxin; maybe she found a better route. 
She might have a decent flashlight or light-amp goggles so she could see. 
Or she might have had a full environment suit. 

Or what the hell, maybe she had a touch of the blue medicine show. 
There were all kinds of ways she could have survived. 

But maybe she didn’t. I refused to think about it. 

It was time to move on. 


12 


I was back to trusting the old Fly instincts again. There were 
plenty of more unreliable things, such as any decision by Lieutenant 
Weems. Hadn’t thought of Weems for a while. My lip curled; Weems was 
probably the first zombie; reworking him would take the least amount of 
effort. 

I felt something in my hand. I stared—the thing I’d fished out of the 
sludge! I held it up close, staring in confusion. Then it clicked—it was a 
map, a video schematic of the labs. Jesus and Mary . . . I guess even the 
greenest cloud can have a silver-screen lining. 

I decided to follow the same road map I’d been on for several levels now: 
down, down, down . . . no reason to stop. I might as well see what was at 
the very bottom level—which, according to the map I’d seen in the nuclear 
plant, was the main computer station, two floors down. But in the absence 
of Arlene marks, I’d have to plan the route myself . . . just as soon as I could 
make tops and bottoms out of my new toy. 

I suddenly felt a wave of weakness and fever; I hoped I hadn’t already 
given myself a death sentence from the toxin. 

Phobos Lab was dark. Phobos Lab stank like an open sewer. But if there 
was anything left of the original installation here, then medical supplies had 
to be near at hand, if they hadn’t been left in the typical condition of guns 
and radio sets. I picked that as my first priority; I needed an all-purpose 
antitoxin and a stimulant. 

Leaning against a wall for support, I found a weapons locker the hard 
way: I leaned against it and the door collapsed inward. 

Guns! I pawed through my treasure trove, scooping up as much ammo as 
I could shovel into my pack. Then I stared in reverence; beneath the shells 
and bullets rested a state-of-the-art, AB-10 machine pistol. The question 


was, did it still work after scores of zombies and spinys had monkeyed with 
it? 

I checked it out, cleaned the barrel, then reloaded it. I almost pulled the 
trigger to do the only test that really counts, but stuck to my original policy 
of not making any more noise than was absolutely required. 

I cleaned the machine pistol as thoroughly as I could before adding it to 
my arsenal. There was little doubt of this lethal package receiving a test real 
soon, with a real target, and hopefully with a margin of error to try 
something else if it failed. The best choice might be to have the pistol in one 
hand and the shotgun in the other. Nothing wrong with insurance, even if it 
made me feel a bit like a Wild West gunfighter. 

As I stood, shifting the backpack to be more comfortable and finding a 
place for all the weapons, a sudden attack of dizziness hit me like a 
grenade. Medical attention had just become my number-one priority again. 

I studied my hand map, working the buttons to make the pretty picture 
slide up and down. First task was to find me—no helpful “You Are Here” 
on this puppy. At last I found the wall crossing a trench. . . no sign of toxic 
sludge on the map, of course. 

I must have been living right, because the nearest infirmary—marked 
with a red cross—was located just a quarter klick away, spitting distance. I 
found it, and there wasn’t a single monster doctor or devil nurse. Here I'd 
been expecting a typical medical establishment and was _ pleasantly 
surprised. 

And there were lights, the first fully operational light Pd found in the 
complex. If the lights had survived, maybe the doctoring stuff was still here 
and intact. 

I resisted the impulse to cross my fingers as I unlatched and opened the 
first promising cabinet. Mother lode . . . thanks, Mom. I removed a Medikit 
with the seal still unbroken and popped her open. Inside were bandages, 
antitoxin compounds, even ointment for burns. (My face still felt as hot as if 
I had a sunburn, for which I could thank a fireball instead of a weekend at 
the beach.) 

I found a clean room, a metal table next to a mirror, all kinds of light, 
even a shower cubicle. It was time for Dr. Taggart to make a house call. 

I didn’t do too badly, really. First off, I locked the doors, turned out all 
the lights except the one in the room with the table and the shower, placed 


the shotgun right up against the stall, where I could grab it in a second, and, 
facing the closed office door the entire time and leaving the shower door 
ajar, I took the risk of bathing. 

Sick as I’d been feeling since immersing myself in the ooze, the mere act 
of washing it all away made me feel considerably better. I turned the nozzle 
for Hot up as high as I could stand it and felt the cuts and bruises sting, then 
feel better. My burned face didn’t get anything out of the shower but pain, 
but the rest of my body was doing too well for me to care. 

If the shower was heaven, then the fresh towel was a piece of Eden. Here 
I had struck a mortal blow against the shores of hell. The rest was pretty 
simple. I put antibiotic and bandages on the worst of my wounds and cuts, 
taped my bruised ribs (didn’t even remember where I got them), and took 
my time smearing the cold, soothing ointment on the burns. 

The only moment when Doc Taggart almost failed his patient was when 
he—when /—noticed thirty or forty hypodermics, all neatly labeled 
GENERAL STIMULANT. I don’t like needles. Never have. 

But there was good reason to pick up one of those needles and give 
myself a shot. Just as good a reason to pack some in shock-proof carriers 
and take them along. I could run into Arlene, and she might need a lift. I 
might run into some other survivor. And if I were going to do all that, the 
only reasonable thing was for me to give myself an injection first. 

You don’t need to do that, said the little voice in my head. Just find 
another blue-faced sphere. 

I argued with the voice: “It might be a once in a lifetime fluke. I can’t 
count on that happening again.” That’s when I noticed that I was talking to 
myself. Sheeesh, all this just to avoid sticking myself with a needle! 

No more. I bravely wielded the needle, got out the alcohol and cotton 
swab. This couldn’t be any worse than what I’d been going through lately. 
Well, not by much anyway. 

I wolfed some food from the small refrigerator, then hunted for a 
flashlight. Alas, all I found was one of those pencil-beam lights; if I wanted 
to find out if a zombie had a sore throat, or any throat at all, I was set. 

According to my map, I had to go north to find some sort of route down. 
At least my compass was still functioning. I hated to leave, but the infirmary 
had done its job. I was tired, not exhausted, hungry, not starving, and not 
shaking like I had amebic dysentery. The only problem, aside from demons, 


two-legged pigs, and murderous corpses, was that I had lost Arlene’s trail; if 
she were hurt, laying up somewhere, I might accidentally leave her behind 
on an upper level. The point was that I could concentrate again. 

The last thing I did before stepping out again into the dark was check the 
boots. They’d held up better than I thought, but I stuffed some pillowcases 
in for added insulation. 

Outside, it was just as dark as before, but I wasn’t as bothered this time; 
the human race may not have blue spheres, but we do all right. I stayed in 
that frame of mind as I went north. I scuttled along the corridors, letting my 
shotgun peek around corners first, until I reached a huge chamber. It was 
dark, but not the pitch-black I had just come from. At least I could tell I had 
entered a larger area. 

The next moment I was under attack. Claws raked across the shoulder 
plates of the battle armor I had just reinforced. When I tried to fend off the 
enemy, I half expected to feel the crocodile-type hide of the spiked 
monsters; but instead, my hands sank into a pulpy mass. And the contact 
made my flesh crawl even through my thick gloves. 

The light was on, and I should have been able to see the scum, but I was 
getting nothing. Then as I pushed against the jellylike stuff and took a few 
faltering steps back, I saw a familiar shimmering. The same thing I'd seen 
when I thought I was fighting a ghost. That time, the issue was resolved by 
a miracle fireball; this time, I was on my own. 

Didn’t this goddamned, jelly-shimmering, half-assed, invisible son of a 
bitch know the rules? Ghosts can’t hurt people—they can only scare them 
to death! Then the Caspar pounded me, knocking me back on my butt and 
kicking the wind out of me. I thanked Mary for the armor as I shoved the 
barrel of the shotgun right into the shimmering effect and pulled the trigger, 
hoping that if this thing had a mouth, that was exactly where he was going 
to get it. 

I don’t know if I killed it. I don’t know if it can be killed. But it didn’t 
bother me anymore after that. Not liking the idea of being followed by more 
invisible spooks, I jogged for a while, hoping to be done with this part as 
soon as possible. I also kept both eyes open for a pair of light-amp goggles, 
but I’'d used up my good luck quotient at the infirmary. 

To exit the labs, I had to enter the darkest room yet, black as coal. I 
wasn’t surprised. This was at the north end of the installation, where, after 


groping in the dark by touch and even daring to use my tiny penlight, I 
finally found a small opening. This led down a narrow corridor to a tight, 
metal, spiral staircase going down—way down. I started to get very dizzy, 
spinning around so many times. 

Central Processing had more tight, narrow corridors than anywhere else 
on Phobos. Good thing I’m not claustrophobic. The light was better than the 
labs; but that’s like saying L.A. cab drivers are more polite than cab drivers 
in Mexico City. 

And at long, long last, I found another A.S.! I stared at it, overwhelmed 
by inappropriate emotion. She was alive! She got this far! Relief was a 
physical thing, perched on my back. 

The arrow pointed to a branching corridor that seemed small enough to 
give a midget a backache; but crawling down it was a good move. At the 
other end was a completely intact map of this section. The bad guys must 
have been getting careless lately. If this kept up, I might find a functioning 
radio. 

Central Processing was laid out in a rough triangular shape. Made me 
think of a robot riding a motorcycle. Maybe I was more wasted than I 
realized. 

The southeast corner was made up of four interconnected rooms. A 
warning note was attached that three motion detector triggers will close any 
door in the facility for a span of thirty seconds as a security precaution. I 
could just see myself getting caught in a room with wall-to-wall enemies 
while I counted off: “Thirty, twenty-nine, twenty-eight . . . notify next of 
kin.” 

Unfortunately, I couldn’t take the map with me, unless I ripped it out of 
the wall and dragged it along, and my hand map still showed the labs above; 
if there were a way of changing the view, I couldn’t find it. 

It occurred to me that we humans needed to learn everything possible 
about these bastards; otherwise, Earth was a sitting duck. We couldn’t shoot 
it out with these things and expect to survive. We had to outsmart them—or 
die. 

I was surprised that I had survived this long. I was a pretty good Marine. 
There was no false modesty about that. But Arlene was remarkable; if I 
could survive, surely she could! Hoped she would keep it up. Hoped I 
would, too; but this nonsense couldn’t go on forever. 


As I looked at the map, I knew, I just knew, that the thirty-second 
security rule about doors meant there was a welcoming committee waiting 
for me. Well, you knew the job was dangerous when you took it, Fly. They’ll 
get you in the end. 

But who were “they?” 

They weren’t the pitiful wrecks that looked human though dead inside. 
They weren’t the spinys or metal skulls or ghosts, either. The one making 
snuffling pig sounds gave me the creeps; but somehow I knew the creature 
was mentally no more than an animal. If I hadn’t encountered the one 
monster who enjoyed talking, I’d be tempted to conclude we were being 
invaded by an alien barnyard. 

But the intelligence was there; just well-hidden. Even without the talking 
demon, the alien technology itself was proof of a “mastermind.” 

So why didn’t the intelligence simply organize the monsters and zombies 
into a naval search pattern and be done with it? Why were Arlene and I 
being allowed to play Gypsy, entering one level after another, shooting it 
out with pretty much the same cast of characters, encountering the same 
hazards . . . and beating them over and over and over again? 

Maybe it was all a pre-invasion test, or worse still, a sadistic game. But 
test or game, it had to be teaching the Enemy Mind something important. 
The important question for the survival of the human race was: What the 
hell was I learning? 

I hated to admit it, but so far the answer was not much. 


13 


One thing I was learning, though: speed. While I debated the finer 
points of philosophy with myself, a mob of zombies and spinys burst 
through the door at the back end of the corridor, the one ’'d come through 
myself, as if they owned the damned place; they noticed me and tore down 
the narrow corridor. I did not take longer than a microsecond to resolve the 
question—I ran like a bat out of hell, a bat trying to get the hell out of hell. 
Although finding the commanding officer of the invasion was an important 
issue, I decided it could wait until later for review. Much later. 

With this many of the enemy breathing down my neck, the shotgun was 
useless. Maybe my new machine pistol would have worked . . . but what I 
already had in my hands was the rocket launcher. 

For an instant I considered the narrow corridor that might channel the 
blast right back in my face, the proximity of the nearest spiny . . . for an 
instant. Then I dug my heel in and spun, ready to rock ’n’ roll. 

The explosion was so loud that I didn’t hear it. I felt it. A giant, invisible 
hand threw me to the ground. My eyes were open, and I saw the whole 
contingent that was on my tail vanish in a spray of blood and fire. 

The sight was something to think about; especially since it was the last 
sight I saw. 

I must have lost consciousness. An indeterminate time later, I began to 
hear a sound, too loud and annoying to sleep through. Like all the church 
bells the penguins ever rung at me, all the bells in the world in my head. I 
still couldn’t see anything, just a bright afterimage. 

It was about fifteen minutes before the bells were replaced by a buzzing 
sound, then the slosh-slosh of blood in my ears. I would have been easy 
pickin’s, as Gunny Goforth would say. Maybe I was saved by looking as 
dead as the rest of them. 


When I was able, I crawled along the corridor, dragging my feet. There 
was no time to examine my possessions. One thing for certain: if those glass 
syringes were still in one piece inside their supposedly shock-proof 
container, I’d be giving more product endorsements. 

Shaking my head clear and staggering to my feet, I finally made it to the 
one long, spacious corridor in the otherwise cramped, tight, ore-processing 
center. This one was well marked on the map I’d studied—the only route to 
what the map indicated were the stairs down. Judging from the red and gold 
and brown streaks on the rough walls, this corridor had been carved right 
out of the rock of Phobos. I liked it and hoped it wouldn’t be reworked into 
something sickening. 

Halfway down the corridor, I suddenly felt lightheaded and my stomach 
broke loose from its moorings. At first I thought I was experiencing more 
symptoms from the rocket blast. Then I realized what was happening. No 
one goes to space without experiencing zero-g, and you never forget it. This 
was damned close enough! I should have studied the map more closely 
when I had the chance . . . the middle section of this corridor must pass 
outside the ancient, alien gravity-zone. 

A handrail was installed for the obvious reason. Grabbing it, I pulled 
myself along; a single tug was enough to overcome friction in Phobos’s 
minuscule natural gravity. I’'d spent enough time on the ship to Mars that 
this was simple enough, unless I had the bad luck to be attacked right now; 
I'd never taken zero-g combat training. 

Pulling myself around a corner, I floated practically into the arms of a 
triplet of spinys. Luck has never been my long suit. But these leathery 
bastards were walking on the walls and ceiling, as if they enjoyed their own, 
personal gravity that followed them around, each oriented in a different 
direction. 

One more piece of evidence that they were unbeatable. Then one of them 
looked right at me and spoke: ““Gosh—are we having a ball, or what?” 

It hocked a loogie into its hand, where the mucus immediately burst into 
flame. 

My hog leg was tucked in the webbing at my back, and there was no 
room to draw it in this corridor, no time to work it free. The demon raised 
the flaming ball of snot, grinning like a goblin. 


I threw my head back, rotating my body in the microgravity. I didn’t 
bother drawing the shotgun; when I rotated my body so the barrel was 
pointing at that cracked and grinning face, I fired. 

A lucky shot. Blew its head clean off. Guess my luck’s not so abysmal 
after all. 

The blast acted like a rocket, propelling me backward. When I stopped 
spinning, I grabbed the rail, drew the shotgun free, and pulled myself back 
where I'd left off. 

The two remaining monsters had forgotten all about me; they were 
fighting each other, claws dug into throats, bloody drool trickling down 
wrinkled chins and bursting into flame. 

Was it possible, just one “brain” to a set? Kill the mastermind, and the 
rest turn on each other? 

Evidently, the Mind behind the invasion had the power to manifest itself 
through only one or two individuals in a group. 

I tucked that one away in the hindbrain; I would use it later. 

I waited politely until one brain-dead spiny offed the other; then I 
rewarded the victor with the spoils: a twelve-gauge blast to the face, this 
time with my back braced against the wall. 

I hauled ass along the corridor to the gravity zone. At the far north end of 
the facility, I found a switch that opened a door leading to the stairway 
where I could process myself right out of Central Processing. 

Down one flight on the spiral, metal-grate stairway, the Computer Station 
welcomed me with a thin layer of green sludge. At this point I just didn’t 
care. I was willing to jump into the ooze and slog through it as long as my 
boots held out. I wanted out of here! I ran without stopping until I 
discovered that whatever crap-for-brains idiot designed this playground set 
it up so you go around in circles before noticing you were going around in 
circles. 

The Computer Station was a haze of forgetfulness. It started out badly 
when I couldn’t find an Arlene mark. I hunted along every passageway 
without luck; either she followed a totally different route and our paths did 
not cross, or more likely, she had a reception committee waiting for her 
when she climbed down the ladder, and she was in a running firefight until 
she found a bolt-hole. 


The damnedest part was, this was the lowest level, so far as I knew. If 
they finally ran her to ground, I should have found her . . . or her remains. 
There was nowhere else for Arlene to go. 

There were few monsters on this floor; I shot a couple of spinys in the 
back—hey, I’m not proud—but mostly avoided the patrols. 

En route, I picked up two blue key cards and three yellows, plucking one 
off the “dead” body of a zombie. Something or someone had gnawed off its 
legs and one arm; it was still animate as I approached, and tried to bite me; 
but I was faster (and more ruthless). I blew its brains out, putting it out of 
misery, and took the key card tucked into its belt. 

I found two maps, both burned beyond recognition. But by sheer 
persistence, I finally found it: one of those big, metallic doors that like to 
stand between me and where I want to go. One of those key-card teases that 
demand you stick it in. 

But this bitch had a special feature—an irritating, unisex, nasally, 
parking-lot ticket-machine voice, the kind that says “Please take the ticket,” 
as if you’re a bumpkin from Mad Dog, Arkansas, who’s never seen a car 
park before. No monster could ever create such a surreal torture device of 
art. It took a human touch. 

“Hello,” it said, “to exit the Computer Station, please insert your gold 
security card now.” 

All right; I supposed yellow was as good as gold. I inserted the card, and 
the cheap trick chirped “Thank you. To exit the Control Station, please 
insert your blue security card now.” 

I began to hear screams behind me, up the corridor; the damned door had 
probably notified “security” while it deliberately delayed me. I fumbled the 
blue key card into the slot—but I knew exactly what was coming. 

“Thank you. To exit the Computer Station, please insert your red security 
card now.” 

If there were a red key card anywhere on this level, I was a purple-assed 
baboon. 

And I didn’t become a Marine to put up with this crap. Even the spinys 
were less frustrating than this! 

But I had a solution. Last time I’d fired a rocket, ’'d made the mistake of 
standing too damned close. So I made sure I got far away from that smug 


bitch of a door, placing myself squarely behind a column and part of a 
staircase. 

I fired both rockets from the launcher simultaneously. Just to be sure. 
The result was outstanding, excellent, a credit to the Corps. As loud as it 
was, it didn’t deafen me this time. At this distance, the head gear worked 
like it was supposed to. 

I walked through the smoking ruins of that bloody door with a sense of 
satisfaction greater than when I’d winged that toxin barrel and taken out a 
roomful of zombies with one bullet. I’d struck a blow against the True Evil, 
the chowderheaded humans who designed these installations! 

From now on I refused to worry about plastic cards and security keys. 
Nothing could stop me. Then I found the lift that should have taken me out 
of there—the lift at the very end of the facility, my reward for having all the 
stupid cards. 

The entire shaft was filled with human and animal remains, a hellish 
grain elevator. I don’t know how long I stood there, staring stupidly. Then 
nausea overwhelmed me and I vomited for several minutes. Weak and 
shaky, I thought for several more minutes that I had climbed the farthest 
down I could go in the Phobos installation. A dead end. Nowhere to go but 
back the way I came. I knew I couldn’t make it, but I was long past 
crawling into a corner and playing fetus. ’'d go down fighting if I went, 
hoping somehow Arlene had escaped what was a death trap for me. 

Even though it was a long shot, I thought again of the possibility of 
blowing up Phobos. Better that than let these bastards win! Then I noticed a 
foul, bloodred, evil-glowing circle in the floor; it had not been there a 
moment ago. A ghastly stench arose from the orifice, like human flesh 
frying on the griddle. I once missed getting firebombed by a Kerifistani 
terrorist; I was on guard duty at the Marine Corps compound when the main 
barracks went up. Thirty-three buddies burned to death. You never forget 
that smell. 

They transferred me to Fox Company within forty-eight hours. 

This hole pulsed like a heartbeat. There was a “ladder” made of light 
pink, fleshy cords that appeared to sweat. 

I didn’t have to be a rocket scientist to know that no human ever made 
this baby. Besides, this wasn’t a job for a rocket scientist; this was a job for 
someone rock stupid enough to be a Marine. Resigned, I slung my shotgun 


and rifle, holstered the machine pistol, and started climbing down the sticky, 
wet, springy ladder. 

At the bottom there was plenty of light, at least; a sickly reddish light. 
The flesh-pit ladder dropped me into the largest corridor I’d seen yet. I 
would have said it was carved out of the rock of this moon, the same as 
Phobos Lab, but the inside of the walls seemed to perspire, like the ladder. 
Holding my breath and looking close, I saw hundreds, thousands, of small 
orifices opening and closing to the same steady beat as the red circle above. 
I decided that I’d done enough close examination for a lifetime. 

Then, by God, I saw it—another A.S., biggest one yet! Even in the heart 
of hell, I was cheered to know I wasn’t alone. I didn’t exactly whistle a 
tune, but I smiled grimly. 

Arlene’s mark was accompanied by a crude drawing of a skull and 
crossbones with an arrow pointing straight ahead. A second arrow pointed 
out a narrow slit in the wall, a slit that was a friendly hole-in-rock, not 
pulsating or anything disgusting; a slit into what looked to be the outside. 
We were hundreds of meters below the surface of tiny Phobos, but there 
was goddamn daylight coming through that opening. 

But that was one mother of a narrow crack. Could I get through that? 
Could Arlene, even? I touched the edge of the slit—tacky blood, a couple of 
hours old, tops. Mary, Mother of God . . . | had a vision. She had gone out, 
right there. She shoved herself so hard, tearing at that crack, that she flayed 
off huge strips of skin—but she didn’t care. She wanted out; she wanted out 
bad; she wanted out right then, not five seconds later. 

Leading me to the obvious conclusion: Arlene had seen something up 
ahead that even she was too terrified to face. 


14 


I stared at the skull and crossbones. Whatever was up ahead was 
bad enough for Arlene to claw her way through a tiny crack in the wall 
rather than face it. Yet she wasted precious seconds leaving the warning for 
Yours Truly. 

Thank God I didn’t have to solve the mystery of the skull and 
crossbones. Getting through that crack would be an achievement all by 
itself. 

Ahead I began to hear a low, slow pounding, almost like someone 
beating on a monster drum a mile distant. Well, I could take that—so long 
as it stayed there. I struggled out of my armor and pressed my right arm and 
shoulder into the crack. 

But there I stuck. I braced my foot against the floor and shoved; several 
minutes and several pounds of flesh later, I was utterly convinced I could 
never fit through that crack unless I dismembered myself and threw the 
pieces through one at a time. Wonder if I'll seriously consider that option 
when I see what’s ahead? | thought. 

So now what? I sat on the floor, pounding my head with my hand in 
frustration. If I went forward, I was on my own. Arlene was no coward... 
if the Thing ahead scared the bejesus out of her, enough that she forced her 
way through a crack several sizes too small—then what in God’s name was 
it? 

Numbly, I stood, pulling on the armor again. As Mehitabel the cat said to 
Archie the cockroach, wotthehell, wotthehell. I already roamed the halls of 
the damned; what did I have to lose? J suppose I could sit here and starve to 
death. 

Shaking, I moved forward at snail speed, loaded rocket launcher in hand; 
but what if I found myself eyeball-to-eyeball with . . . with whatever It was? 


A rocket up the nose might piss it off—but at point-blank range, it would 
also fry Corporal Fly! 

Ahead, I found an old-fashioned wooden elevator next to an old- 
fashioned rusted button. Somehow they seemed to fit right in here. In a 
place with living ladders, a few museum places were hardly out of line. 

I pushed the button. With a slow grinding sound, the lift began to 
descend. So far so good. It reached ground level, and I clumped aboard. 
What the hell else could I do? There was one button, and I pushed it. 

The lift creaked and groaned, like it was a hundred years old, 
announcing my arrival to anyone inside. I braced, wondering whether to 
shift to the shotgun. Then it stopped up one floor . . . and my God, I saw 
what was inside! 

On a pair of iron thrones sat the largest, reddest, most horrible demons I 
could imagine, compared to which the other guys were fit for hosting kiddie 
shows on Saturday mornings. Giant minotaurs with goat limbs for legs, and 
curling, savage horns on the top of their flat, broad heads. The chests and 
arms were carved from pure muscle. Their claws were so vicious that there 
was no comparison to the puny stuff ’d seen up until now. 

Princes of hell... 

And they were looking directly at me. So far, so bad. 

I froze, whimpering like a Cub Scout. All I could think was, Oh Lord, 
the sisters were right all along! 

The hell-prince on the left rose, trumpeting a marrow-freezing roar of 
discovery. 

Come on, come on, come on, Fly! Snap out of it; get the hell out of 
Dodge! J hated every minute of every day of basic at Parris Island—and I 
bow at Staff Sergeant Stern’s feet and kiss his shiny boots for every second 
of it: my training kick-started my paralyzed legs even while my brain was 
struggling to remember the Lord’s Prayer . . . all I could get was “Hail, 
Jesus,” and I knew that was wrong. 

Faster than I thought myself capable, I bolted—but forward, right at the 
things—and skirted between the forest of red legs and into the black-dark 
beyond! If they’d been any smaller, they would have had my head for lunch. 

I ran across a long stretch of floor and heard the familiar pig snorts left 
and right. I ran through utter blackness until I hit a wall, banging my shins. 
I hardly noticed. There I spun, snarling, fishing for my riot gun. 


If the porcine sons of bitches wanted Fly Taggart, they could bloody well 
take him . . . but not cheaply! 

They were converging on me; I could hear their snufflings and hungry 
growls. What the hell; I was dead anyway, right? I raised the shotgun and 
pounded a shell straight in front of me. 

One of the pig-demons screamed in pain. Oh . . . you mean they can be 
hurt? I'd been wondering. 

I scuttled right; the wall came to a point, folding back on itself. I slipped 
around and immediately barked my already-bruised shin on a barrel of that 
green, toxic mess. 

Staring into the sickly glow, I had a shimmer of an idea. Quickly, before 
I could think twice and decide against it, I heaved over the barrel. The goo 
spilled out of the 120-liter drum . . . and now my whole corner was lit by a 
hellish, green glow. I could see! 

I was in a pointy corner amid a forest of toxin barrels; but the monsters 
coming after me were still invisible. I was under attack by ghosts . . . and 
the ghosts and the pig-things were evidently one and the same. 

But Yours Truly, Flynn Taggart, never forgets a scam. 

I backed away from the flickering shadows, into the actual point. Maybe 
I couldn’t see them, but they sure as hell could see me; they charged. 

I shot. Not a ghost; I shot a barrel. 

The explosion chain-reactioned, and I dived for the deck. Too late, I 
remembered the ten or eleven rockets in my bandoleers. Luckily, the 
explosion stopped just short of me. 

When the acrid rain of toxic waste stopped falling, I jumped to my feet. 
My entire body resonated, and my inner ear was confused; I balanced 
precariously on my hind legs, shotgun wavering up, down, and sideways . . . 
but my ghosts appeared to have died—again. At least, they didn’t attack. 

Staring wildly around the room, now lit by the green glow of ten 
thousand droplets of toxin sprayed far and near, I realized to my surprise 
that the room was actually a huge, star-shaped chamber. That seemed right 
in line with everything else. If they could have swastikas, why not star- 
chamber proceedings? Alas, my restful reverie was short-lived; the hideous 
hell-princes had seen my explosion and come to investigate. 

But this time, I knew what to expect. Nuns or no nuns, I told myself over 
and over that these were alien life-forms, not demons. They couldn’t be real 


demons, could they? Hell was a myth—wasn’t it? 

I raised my rocket launcher and let the first hell-prince have it at forty 
meters. The blast blew the motherless bastard backward, but it got to its 
feet. I couldn’t believe it! 

I fired a second time, pack-loaded with one smooth move, and shot a 
third rocket. The giant got up again and now it was joined by its comrade. 
This was not going according to plan. 

They pointed their clawed hands at me; but instead of the usual balls of 
flaming snot, these “demons” fired green energy pulses out of wrist- 
launchers. I hugged the dirt as the stuff crackled over my head and made 
every hair on my head stand on end. Not very demonic, but pretty damned 
deadly! 

My turn again; in desperation, I pumped rocket number four at the first 
hell-prince, and at last it seemed to do some damage. It got to its feet slowly 
and seemed confused about where I was. There was no reason to even try 
bothering the new one if I couldn’t find out what repeated hammering did to 
the first minotaur. Yeah, minotaurs. They weren’t demons; that Greek, 
Theseus, killed one. 

Reload, rocket five, and finally that did the trick: number one went down 
and didn’t get up again. But with behavior I was starting to expect from all 
godless creatures, it reached up a clawed hand and grabbed the other hell- 
prince. 

Number two struggled to free itself, and I seized my opportunity. 
Screaming like a banshee, I charged to just out of range of its reach. 
Enraged, it slashed furiously; but my prayers were answered, and it was too 
mad to think of shooting energy bolts. I leaned in to shove the launcher 
right down the creature’s enormous, howling mouth. And Fly let fly... 

I won’t even try to describe its breath. 

The minotaur swallowed the little rocket, about the relative size of a 
multivitamin, and was literally blown away. I was knocked silly by the blast 
at such close proximity. 

I came to, surprised to be coming to. Losing consciousness in a place 
like this seemed like a one-way ticket to oblivion. 

I was lying on the floor of the same enormous, starshaped chamber; but 
the walls had fallen, crumbling into constituent bricks outside, leaving the 


way clear to the outside. That whole concept of “outside” bothered me. 
Why wasn’t I a corpse-sicle, floating in space? 

There was air to breathe. There was an overcast sky to watch, complete 
with low-hanging clouds; dark clouds before a storm. Wherever I was, it 
sure as hell wasn’t Phobos. 

I found a platform behind the building. There was a switch. I pressed it 


and watched a stairway slowly rise. Wotthehell, Archie, wotthehell . . . I 
walked up the stairs. 
At the very top was a Gate . . . a working Gate. It was marked by a 


flickering symbol that gave me a splitting headache when I tried to 
concentrate on the design. I approached it, eyes averted. 

And damn me if there wasn’t Arlene Sanders’s last mark, right next to 
the Gate, pointing directly at the symbol. She’d written a single word: 
OUT? 

I didn’t know. But I didn’t hesitate a moment. If that were the way 
Arlene went... 

Then that was where I was going. 

Without a glance back, I stepped aboard. 


15 


Time had no meaning for Fly Taggart—the memory of being Fly 
Taggart. He had no body but retained a consciousness somehow, 
somewhere. A sense of motion, but that might only be another memory. 

Remembering a hand created a hand. Remembering a foot resulted in the 
sensation of a foot, a painful sensation from where his ankle had been 
bruised. Memory of a backache condensed into a patch of flesh and blood 
that was a back. 

Memory of breath turned emptiness into a pair of lungs. Recollections of 
hot days on a summer beach left their imprint on a forehead slick with 
sweat. 

Then he had a whole body, floating in a warm current of air slowly 
cooling; an upside-down vertigo turning his stomach, which meant he had a 
stomach. The fall wasn’t long, and he skinned his knees on a hard metal 
surface before falling forward on his face. The air was cold. 

He blinked eyes in an aching head. He couldn’t see anything but white 
and red spots chasing each other across a field of darkness. The man 
panicked at the thought that he’d been blinded; but gradually vision 
returned. There wasn’t much worth seeing. 

The light was dim. He wanted to breathe fresh air again, as he had 
before stepping on the platform. He’d been breathing the stale air of 
spaceships and the Mars station and the Phobos installations for so long 
he’d almost forgotten what fresh air was like. Even if it had been fake, he 
wanted it again. But when he filled his lungs, it was that disgusting sour- 
lemon smell he had first noticed when he killed his first zombie. He was a 
man again, but he didn’t want to be back in hell. Yet he had traveled 
somewhere, hadn’t he? He felt he’d come a very long way just to reach... 

I didn’t know where I was. Instinctively, I reached with my left hand for 
the machine pistol, the weapon I could most quickly bring into play. My 


hand slapped bare flesh. There was nothing on my chest but air. I looked 
down and saw that I was naked. 

Jesus and Mother Mary. And after all that work gathering shotgun, Sig- 
Cow, and rocket launcher. 

Having lost my clothes during the strange journey didn’t bother me, 
except for the drop in temperature; but I didn’t want to turn into dead meat 
because I didn’t have weapons. A naked man is an unarmed man. 

I wasn’t going to waste another second before reconnoitering. If there 
were monsters anywhere near here, then I had to get my hands on a firearm 
right away. The sour-lemon smell was a dead giveaway—zombies lurked 
somewhere in the shadows. I’'d come through a gateway with nothing but 
my body, but at least I was breathing. I wanted to keep it that way. 

The gravity was Earth normal. As my eyes adjusted to dim light, I saw I 
was in an oblong, rectangular building. Having had the experience of being 
“outside” before the transfer, I didn’t look forward to roaming corridors 
again. I almost hated that idea more than the prospect of fighting monsters. 

Suddenly it didn’t feel merely cool any longer. It had gotten downright 
cold. Being stark naked presented other problems; with all the disgusting 
ways to die I had recently discovered, I’d be damned if I wanted to catch 
my death of cold. 

Adrenaline pumping madly—my drug of choice—I ran in the most 
promising direction. A red light pulsed dimly in the shadows directly ahead; 
and the flat, slapping sound of bare feet against the metal floor seemed 
almost as loud as my boots had earlier. 

If this setup were anything like the one Id left, I actually wanted to find 
a zombie! “Alive” or dead, they were armed with what I needed, and a lot 
easier to deal with than the spinys or ghosts. 

I found the source of the red light: an entire wall emitted crimson 
illumination; at the bottom was an inverted-cross cutout, just big enough to 
serve as a doorway. It was directly in line with a square platform on the 
ground. The platform was red, too. The symbolism was blasphemy— 
anyone walking through the “doorway” would have the privilege of being 
crucified. The religious imagery was starting to piss me off; whoever or 
whatever was behind this had learned things about human psychology that I 
preferred it not know. I slipped through, feeling dirty and corrupted. 


I felt an unholy chill as I walked through the inverted cross in the red 
wall, the color of communion wine, the color of blood from fallen 
comrades. 

How right I was to think of buddies lost in battle. Directly on the other 
side of the opening was the dead body of a UAC technician locked in mortal 
embrace with a soldier I recognized from Fox Company. I wasn’t likely to 
forget Ordover. 

The youngest kid in the outfit, we’d bagged on him something fierce. He 
was patriotic to the “Corps” and easy to rag. As I looked at the remains of 
this friendly private, the boyish face that hadn’t been altered even in death, I 
regretted the times I’d helped get him drunk. 

Finding out that Johnny enjoyed singing old ballads, badly off-key, when 
he was honed and capped was too much temptation. I thought that was as 
funny as everyone else did. 

“Sorry, kid,’ I muttered to his corpse, relieved that at least he’d received 
the gift of a clean death. He hadn’t been reworked. Now it was Johnny’s 
turn to provide Fly Taggart with a piece of serious artillery. He was lying on 
top of a Sig-Cow with a fifty-round magazine. Thanks to him, I might still 
be a naked savage, but I was back in the game. I was a Marine once more. 

As I examined my surroundings, I had the feeling I’'d been dropped into 
a giant warehouse. There were huge boxes, or crates, all over the place with 
UAC stenciled on them. I began to explore and noticed a red, glowing 
square that emitted a curious heat. I avoided it for the moment, welcome 
though the heat would be. 

Having gotten in the habit of following Arlene’s arrows, I started 
hunting. And looking for more weapons, as well as food, water, and an 
unbroken radio. I was so intent on all this that I barely noticed it when I 
turned a corner and was back in zombie country. 

I shouldered the rifle and fired while they wasted time roaring. The shot 
was good; the nearest head exploded like a ripe melon. That startled me; it 
was a single bullet, not a grenade! This zombie had to be especially ripe. 

The next one reacted more typically; the bullet made a normal hole and 
the creature fell to the floor, twitching. But I was already pounding a round 
into the head of number three, scutting sideways, firing two or three shots at 
a time. I lost count of how many zombies went down. A few had weapons, 
but none had taken a shot at me yet. 


It was all too easy; then something on the other side returned fire—actual 
fire. The damned, brown spinys were back, complete with their bizarre 
ability to toss flaming snotballs like warm-up pitchers for the devil. 

The easy zombie pickin’s had made me careless. The first fireball was 
too close, far too close, to my face and neck. The stuff stuck to my skin like 
napalm, burning like hell and reminding me that I had no protection over 
any part of my skin or vulnerable parts. 

But I was pumped. With a roar to match a hell-prince, I charged the 
nearest spiny and let my bayonet do the talking. The blade split thick neck 
like a cantaloupe, and the demon dropped, bleeding a deep, ruby red. 

But even with a bayonet stuck in its windpipe and blood pumping out in 
buckets, it stretched a clawed hand up toward me. With a thrust and a yank, 
I tore the neck so badly that the head was hanging lopsided. It would take a 
lot more work than that to actually decapitate the mother, but at least it 
wouldn’t bother me anymore. I needed the bayonet back. I had other fields 
to plow. 

A number of zombies had gathered around as I was busy taking care of 
the demon that I hoped had been the one who burned my face. More spinys 
loitered by the weirdest piece of wall I’d seen yet, with human skulls stuck 
all over it like raisins in a cake. 

A thin female zombie went first, a fat male second, an ex-PFC third. I 
used the bayonet on all of them because there wasn’t room to shoot. 

Pivoting, slashing and stabbing, shouting gleeful curses—this was the 
way to kill! The feel, the smell, the blood pouring out of them beating 
through my veins, all linked. A world of blood. Some had to be mine; but 
this was no time to worry over details. 

Then there was one zombie left. I recognized its face. Recognition 
slowed me down .. . this was a good face, honest and stern, like the men 
who’d settled the frontier. 

Corporal Ryan. Dead eyes in a face I once respected were an invitation 
to do more than kill. I had to erase him from the universe. 

I pinned him with the bayonet; but he was made of stern stuff, even as a 
zombie. Squirming forward, he clawed my face with long, dirty nails. 
Damned rifle was stuck in him! He was far stronger than the others, 
stronger than me. 


Thank God I knew Ryan better than his reanimated corpse did. The 
corporal always carried a 10mm pistol in a back-draw holster. I reached 
behind him. The gun was there! I drew the piece, stuck the business end in 
Ryan’s mouth, and squeezed the trigger. 

His death grip combined with the pool of blood underfoot pulled me to 
the floor. It was too slippery to get up easily. While I freed myself, I tried 
real hard to assimilate the latest data. If zombies were holding a weapon 
when they died, they still used it. But the intelligence required to remember 
a hidden weapon was beyond their reach. 

Slipping and sliding on the blood was distracting . . . and then I realized 
that I was sobbing. Having given myself strict orders to keep emotions 
under control, I felt betrayed. At least I held onto the pistol. 

Standing up, I realized with disgust that the real reason I was weeping 
was because I had temporarily run out of enemy. All the zombies were 
dead-dead, and the monsters who had been watching over by the wall of 
skulls had run off. This was worse than being interrupted in the middle of 
making love. I really felt that. I had good reason to be crying like a baby. 

“Pull yourself together,’ I ordered Yours Truly. “I mean it. Cut the crap, 
right now!” I wasn’t going to put up with any insubordination. 

“Damn you all!” I screamed at the universe. “How long am I supposed to 
take this, over and over?” It was a good question, but nobody had any 
answers. I kicked a zombie’s head, angry that he wasn’t contributing his 
part to the conversation. 

Zombies weren’t the only inanimate objects around; I found a metal 
cabinet that I tore off and flung at a console. Great sound effect. I would 
have moved on in search of glass to break—an even better sound—but I 
noticed my little tantrum had actually led to something useful. As the forest 
fire raging in my brain toned down to a mild fever-delirium, I vowed never 
to say anything bad about dumb luck again. 

A hidden drawer in the console sprang open. I investigated, hoping to 
find a weapon. Instead, I found another of those computer key cards, the 
very same cards I had sworn not to use again while I had my trusty 
rockets . . . the very same rockets I no longer had. Buck Rogers, back to 
square one. I picked up the translucent, blue computer disk. Waste not, want 
not. 


A rifle in one hand, pistol in the other, and a key card clenched in my 
teeth. Not having pockets was becoming a major pain in the butt. 

Why didn’t I simply field-strip a corpse? I don’t know; I guess my brain 
wasn’t rolling on all tank treads. 

One direction seemed as good or bad as any other, so I went back the 
way I had come. As the frenzy of the battle wore off, I was starting to feel 
cold again. The red platform was appealing as the only source of heat I 
knew about around here, the next best thing to a roaring fireplace. It felt 
great as the heat warmed my cold, naked skin. 

Then, as idiots have asked themselves throughout history, I asked the 
magic words “Why not?’—and rubbed my hands over the thing. 

A million flashbulbs exploded in my face. 

By the time I finished blinking the world back into focus, I realized I was 
not in the room I just had been. 

My mouth dropped open. Fly, you gorm, I thought, I think you’ve just 
discovered your first teleporter! 

That square, red platform just had to be the “teleport” pads I had heard 
about when they posted Fox Company to Mars. They were just big enough 
for a man to stand on. . . assuming he felt adventurous. 

I was dubious about the whole thing from day one, and so was Gunny 
Goforth. If I were surrounded by trolls and out of ammo, I’d decided, I 
might try one; nothing short of that would tempt me. 

The teleport pads were already there when humans first arrived, 
presumably built the same time as the Gates and gravity generators. 
Practical folk that we are, we incorporated them into the design of the base; 
UAC used them to transport heavy ingots and equipment. I don’t think 
many people used them; most of us worried about things like souls and 
continuity of consciousness and all that crap. 

Trust Corporal Fly Taggart to render the whole philosophical discussion 
moot by tripping over his own feet into it! 

As I stared stupidly at my new surroundings, a swarm of zombies poured 
around the corner. As the first one fired a round that took me in the 
shoulder, several thoughts whizzed through my mind. First, as I fell to the 
floor, I thought of writing up the careless dolt who’d triggered a teleporter 
by sticking his paws where they weren’t supposed to be. The second 
thought, as I rolled onto my back, was more ironic: moments before, I'd 


been unhappy over running out of zombies. My third thought, as I sat up, 
stunned, was: I’m shot! 

My Sig-Cow was out of reach. I'd let go of it, along with the key card. I 
opened fire with the 10mm. 

A nearby stone platform provided me cover; the zombies were too stupid 
to do the same. They reminded me of Army privates. 

Taking my time about it, I aimed and fired, aimed and fired. The bullets 
went in, the blood came out. I took them one by one, killing the very last at 
point-blank range. 

This time I wasn’t sorry I'd run out of zombies. The bullet in my 
shoulder made me groggy. There was nothing I’d rather do at that moment 
than lie down in a nice, warm pool of blood and sleep forever. 

Nothing suicidal; sleep was good. Rest was a sacrament. 

Willing my reluctant body to move, I got up. 


16 


By now I must have looked like a zombie myself. I felt like one. 
Being honest about it, I had to admit that I didn’t know how a human being 
crossed over into the zombie state. I hadn’t seen the process. The talkative 
monster implied that he could control zombies, but he never said a word 
about how they were made—he simply lied about not reworking me if I 
surrendered. 

I wondered . . . was this how the others became what they were, fighting 
a never-ending war that finally drove them mad? Wasn’t a sign of insanity 
the conviction that everyone and everything is the enemy? That was the way 
I'd been living since I left the cafeteria and the two Rons and began my 
assault on Phobos Base and . . . and wherever the hell I was now. 

Turning a corner, I was greeted by a sight not calculated to reassure a 
man doubting his sanity. A gigantic skull, half the length of a full-grown 
man, glared at me through empty sockets. It seemed to be made of brass. I 
stared into its eyeless sockets before allowing my gaze to lower. The giant, 
metal skull had a tongue; a curving, snaky, metal tongue. 

There was no way this was standard-issue in a UAC refinery! 

Of course, the skull’s tongue had to be a lever. 

“T can’t help it,’ I said, “I’m a born lever-puller.” 

If I were already dead and in hell, it hardly mattered what would happen 
if I pulled the lever. I still had my curiosity. And if I were still alive, trying 
to save humanity from an alien invasion, then I had even more curiosity. 

I pulled the lever. It was ice cold against my already chilled flesh. A 
metallic, grinding noise riveted my attention. It sounded like all the old, 
abandoned automobile plants in Detroit had started up at once. And with all 
that sound, one stupid box rose from the ground containing another pair of 
skull-tongue switches! I pulled the next one in line and heard a click from 
the wall directly in front of me. 


Moving to investigate, I saw a crack of light in the wall, then another and 
another until the yellow lines had formed a perfect square. Secret doors 
were losing their appeal for me. If this one were going to improve my 
opinion, then it had better offer something better than the usual collection of 
monsters. I shoved open the door with one mighty heave. 

A bloody, naked figure held a gun pointed directly at my face. By reflex, 
I shoved my own piece right between its eyes. 

“DROP THE GUN!” 

“DROP THE FREAKIN’ GUN!” 

“PUT IT DOWN, I SWEAR TO GOD PLL BLOW YOUR FOOL 
HEAD—” 

“WHERE I CAN SEE THEM, PUT YOUR HANDS UP—” 

“__AND DON’T MOVE OR—” 

‘“—__GROUND! ON THE GROUND, MOVE!” 

Her eyes. Her eyes were alive. And she spoke . . . words. By now we 
both stood, each pistol pressed against the other’s face, eyes wide with fear, 
wonder, and hope—Was it? Could it be? Could she be?—shouting at the top 
of our voices in pain, rage, and desperate need. 

My hammer was cocked, but my finger outside the trigger guard; I had 
just begun to suspect, just begun... 

Something clicked in my brain. The penny dropped. I recognized the 
bloody, disheveled, pallid creature. 

A dream come true—if true—in a world that specialized in nightmares. 
Panting before my face, watching warily, ready to fire off half the magazine 
if necessary, stood the reason I had come this far and hadn’t yet given up. 

I wanted to say her name, but I couldn’t. We were each locked in a 
perimeter of silence, holding a gun against each other’s face, doubts and 
paranoia having the only voice. One of us would have to say something. 

She went first. “Drop the friggin’ gun!” The command came from a 
lifetime of giving not an inch or trusting without two forms of picture 
ID ... and that had been back on Earth! She’d worked hard, her every 
friendship based on a sense of honor. She’d kicked her way onto the Mars 
mission. And this is what she’d found. 

But she’d survived. And I’d survived. She’d kept me alive with every 
A.S. and arrow; and maybe her fantasy that I’d come after her kept her alive 
—why else use oui private code, a link between just the two of us? 


But now there was no room for sentiment, only for certainty. 

“You are a dead man if you do not drop the freaking gun now.” 

Oops. My arm and hand had been through too much to even consider it. 
My body was wired for instant responses. The same as her body if she were 
still the old Arlene. The only reason I hadn’t blown her away automatically 
was the time spent praying she was alive, and a willingness to take a risk 
right now that she wasn’t really a zombie. No zombie had ever spoken 
before. And somehow, covered with mud and gore, she looked too damned 
bad to be a zombie. Only the living could look that fried! 

“Arlene, your ass is mine,” I replied. “I’ve had the drop on you since I 
opened the damned door.” 

Zombies didn’t talk that way, either. They didn’t tease or smile a moment 
later when awareness crept across a human face. She returned that smile, 
and I knew everything would be all right. 

“Your finger wasn’t even on the trigger, big guy. ’d have blown you 
away before you fumbled around and found it.’ She was wounded, 
disheveled, filthy, terrified, naked . . . and totally, totally alive. 

“You're alive!” I shouted. 

“No, really?” she shouted back. 

We slowly lowered our weapons simultaneously, mirror images of each 
other. Grinning. 

Staring me up and down, she commented, “Nice fashion statement.” I’d 
forgotten I was buck naked. My damned reflexes insisted on embarrassing 
me, and I reflexively covered myself. 

Well, I guess it was one more proof I was still fully human. I doubt that 
zombies are modest. “Turn your back, for Christ’s sake,’ I implored. 

“T will not,” she answered, eyes roving where they shouldn’t. ““You’re the 
first decent thing I’ve seen since this creep show began.” 

If we kept this up, maybe things would get so bloody normal that the 
monsters would simply pack their suitcases and leave. 

Arlene could dish out a hard time when she wanted. I decided to get 
dressed, and finally I noticed the corpses and stripped one. She reached out 
a hand. “No, Fly; don’t put those on yet. Please?” 

My right foot was halfway into a boot far too small to fit. It stretched, 
conforming to the size of my foot: one size truly fits all. Arlene turned as 


red as the crimson wall. “Jesus, I’m sorry, Fly. You’re my buddy; I 
shouldn’t have made you uncomfortable. Forgive me?” 

I finished dressing. It didn’t take long. Now it was my turn to look her 
over, which I did with a lot more subtlety than she did with me. I kept my 
eyes moving where she’d let hers stop in embarrassing places. God, she 
looked good. All the dirt and blood almost gave her the appearance of being 
dressed in a weirdly hip-punk outfit. Her slender waist, tight, firm thighs, 
medium bust, and long arms made me think of more than the undeniable 
fact that she had the body of the ideal orbital pilot—her ultimate goal when 
she’d earned enough in service to take a hiatus, get a degree, and take a 
commission. Space travel needed the occasional boost in morale. 

She finally got the idea. There were plenty of corpses around with 
uniforms waiting to be stripped. I watched her from the corner of my eye as 
she followed my example. The best aspect of these form-fitting uniforms 
was the way they conformed to every contour of the human body. She 
looked just as good in clothes. 

I tried to think of something appropriate to say, then grunted, punching 
her shoulder middling hard. “Now I forgive you,’ I said with a grin. The 
grin didn’t last long. ’'d completely forgotten about the bullet wound in my 
shoulder. The pain finally caught up with me as the adrenaline wore off. 

“Jeez, that looks bad,” she said. “Maybe there’s some Medikits around 
here. You mind holding still while I do some alterations on your shoulder? 
Meanwhile, tell me where the hell you came from.” 

Seemed like a fair deal to me. “Long as you tell me what happened to 
you, A.S. You and the company. And what the hell were you doing hiding 
in a cupboard?” 

She made me go first. I recapped everything that had happened since I 
left Ron and Ron behind in the mess hall. She’d been through the same 
crap; I didn’t need to be overly detailed about the killing. It would be 
nothing more than a sentence completion exercise. 

While I told her my adventures, hoping I wasn’t boring her, we weren’t 
standing still. With the soft suction sounds of our boots on the cold, stone 
floor, we went hunting for medical supplies. “I’d rather go up against a 
dozen zombies than one of these monster aliens,” I was telling Arlene as she 
yanked open a closet door. 


Dozens of shotguns cascaded down on us like bales of hay . . . heavy, 
painful bales of hale. Fortunately, they weren’t loaded. 

Staring at the pile of weapons for a long moment, I put on my best 
annoyed face and asked Arlene: “Can’t you keep your space neat and tidy?” 

Rolling her eyes, she scooped up one of the weapons and tossed it to me. 
She took one, too. I regretted leaving behind such a beautiful pile of 
weaponry. But Arlene and I only had four hands between us. We still 
needed a Medikit, and Arlene was starving. With the burning sensation 
growing in my arm, the Medikit was first on the list. 

Then I was going to get my Recon Babe out of this hellhole. I’d e-mail 
her, if that’s what it took to pack her back to Mars. No, Earth. 

“Get your crap together,’ I said, “and take mental notes.” 

“Notes?” 

“We’ve got to give a full report when we get back. We’re blowing this 
popcorn stand.” 

Arlene smiled wanly. “You have any good ideas on that one, Ace?” 

“T left a land-cart back at the entrance; we can hot-rod it back to the air 
base and take the troopship back to Mars. Or even Earth . . . it should be 
able to make it.” 

Arlene looked around, studying the architecture. 

The architect must have been hired by the Addams Family. Nothing 
seemed normal. The surface of the walls was rough, twisted, the sickening 
color of internal organs. Skulls, monster faces, and decay dominated 
everywhere I chanced to glance. 

Arlene coughed politely. “Just two problems with that plan. First, we’re 
not on Phobos anymore, Toto.” 

“Huh?” 

“We’re on Deimos, and there ain’t no land-carts, or rockets, either. We 
used all the ships to bug our people out four years ago. Fly, we’re stuck 
here, and we don’t even know where ‘here’ is!” 

I must have looked blank; she continued. “Look, Fly, don’t you 
remember when Deimos vanished from the screens?” 

“No, actually. What the hell are you talking about?” 

“Whoops. I guess you were already in custody when we got word from 
Boyd that Deimos had disappeared from the Martian sky.” 


The idea that a moon could vanish bothered me for some reason. 
“‘Wouldn’t there have been gravitational effects?” I asked. 

She laughed before asking, “Are you kidding? Do you know how small 
Deimos is? It’s even smaller than Phobos.” 

“T knew that.” These chunks of space rock were so small that their real 
gravity was theoretical, notwithstanding the alien gravity zones. Although 
I'd become used to fantastic events lately, a little nugget of skepticism 
scratched at my capacity to believe just anything. “How do you know we’re 
on Deimos?” 

“’Cause I’ve been here, Fly. I did a TDS as a yeoman right here while I 
was waiting for an opening in the Light Drop.” 

“A yeoman? But the Marines don’t have any staff positions, only line 
positions.” 

“On loan to the Navy. Technically, I was still a rifleman, but the only 
weapon they issued me was a word processor.” 

I had to think about this. The implications were definitely bad. And the 
image of Arlene Sanders as a secretary was astonishing. 

I looked up. There was a skylight in the ceiling, and where Mars should 
have been, there was nothing. Where stars should have been, there were no 
stars. The black of space was missing, too. All I saw was a gray mist, not to 
be confused with clouds; the texture was all wrong. 

Having a gift for the obvious, I said, “We’re not in orbit around Mars, are 
we?” 

She smiled and patted me on the head. “Congrats, Fly. You win the 
Nobel Prize. You don’t see a pressure dome up there, do you? But we’re 
still sucking air. I know we’re on Deimos; I recognize all the stuff that H. P. 
Lovecraft didn’t redecorate.” 

Who, I wanted to know, was H. P. Lovecraft? If he’d had anything to do 
with this, I wanted to punch his lights out. 

“No, Fly,’ Arlene said. “He was a fantasy writer, early twentieth century 
American. Obsessed with hybrid monsters and underground labyrinths. 
Always describing ancient menaces as eldritch.” 

I’d never heard the word before, but it sounded just right. “This situation 
has got eldritch coming out the ass.” 

“You can say that again,” she agreed. “And this is Deimos, muchacho; 
only thing is, these bastards have taken it somewhere.” 


“Great. So what’s number two?” 

She looked puzzled for a moment, then she frowned. “I don’t want to 
hurt you, Fly.” 

I licked my lips, feeling my stomach contract. I never liked anything 
from a girl that began like that. “What?” 

“You’ve always been more loyal to the Corps than I was, my friend.” 

I stiffened. “What’s wrong with the Corps? The Marines have given me a 
lot, babe, in case you’ve forgotten.” 

She smiled and shook her head. Arlene hadn’t forgotten my father, a 
pathological liar and petty thief who ended up doing twenty-five to life for 
his fourth felony conviction . . . trying to run down a state trooper with his 
pickup truck. He died in Vacaville two years later, from a cerebral 
hemorrhage, they said. 

My father was the pettiest, lowest, meanest man I ever knew. He couldn’t 
even understand the word “honor.” He never knew why I joined the Corps, 
never would have understood if I told him I did it for him . . . so I would 
never be him. 

All right, I confess. Father, forgive me, for I have sinned. The Corps was 
the world to me. 

“There’s nothing wrong with the United States Marine Corps, Fly. But 
damn you, there’s something a bit more important.” 

“Like what?” 

“Like the human freakin’ race!” 

She had me cold. So I got pissed. “Hang the human race! ‘It’s Tommy- 
this, an’ Tommy-that—’” 

“Oh, don’t quote Kipling at me; I’m the one who gave you the book. Fly, 
what do you think the whole purpose of the Corps is?” 

I didn’t say anything. I didn’t like where this was leading; I knew what 
she was going to say. But I couldn’t figure where she was wrong. 

“You're so much into honor and duty, Fly. Don’t you know what duty 
means? We’re the ones on the wall, kiddo. They might not know we’re 
there; might not even know there is a wall, might not give a hang. But that’s 
what we’re here for. 

“Fly, this thing is bigger than just getting us both out alive. We’re the 
only ones here, only ones who know about the invasion . . . the only ones 


who might be able to throw something big and heavy into the gears. And 
damn it to hell, !’m not going to bug out until I do it!” 

I glared at Arlene. I wanted to protect her, get her out of there. I was a 
man, she was my— 

Bull. I was a Marine. And so was Arlene. I understood what she meant 
about the wall; somebody had to man it. Who else? 

I lowered my gaze. We couldn’t just bug out, even if we could find a 
transport on abandoned Deimos. We had to get to the bottom of all this— 
and if Deimos was like Phobos, I had a bad feeling that meant getting to the 
bottom of the Deimos facility. For some weird reason, the alien monster 
demons preferred “down.” 

Besides, her point number one still made sense, too. We don’t even know 
where “here” is. Deimos had been yanked away somewhere . . . we were 
stuck, no rocket, no clue where we might be. . . only that we weren’t in 
orbit around Mars anymore. “Up” meant—what? Empty space? 
Nothingness? The only way out—if there was one—was “down,” following 
the levels of Deimos to the bottom. 

I glared up at her again; her eyes were as cold as steel, as warm as the 
sacred heart. “Well don’t expect me to say I’m sorry,” I muttered. 


17 


While we’d been talking, we came across an undamaged crate 
that looked promising. All that stood between us and it was one of my 
fireball-throwing buddies. 

This one never got a chance to warm up. Arlene whirled and blasted him; 
the demon went down without a chance to hock and spit. 

The label on the crate promised Medikits and comrats. We opened it and 
found a full pantry. 

Arlene insisted on playing nurse before I played chef. She examined my 
shoulder; the bullet had gone straight through. Score one for my side. She 
injected universal antiviral/antibiotic and wrapped a bandage around my 
shoulder, while I gritted my teeth and groaned like a big baby. 

When she finished with my arm, I heaved a sigh of relief. God, I hate 
medical crap! But I was premature; I’d forgotten about my burns. 

Arlene didn’t forget. The cream she applied on my forehead, cheeks, and 
chin hurt worse than the arm injections! It hurt so bad that I started hunting 
for any serious cuts or burns Arlene might have . . . something that would 
require my delicate attention—and lots of cream. Despite her appearance, 
she was disgustingly healthy. 

Now it was her turn to tell a story. “Fly,” she began, pausing to gulp 
water from a bottle we’d extracted from the crate, “I don’t want to see 
anything like that first assault ever again.” 

She sat with her back to a wall, and I stood where I had a good view of 
anything coming or going. I had to find out what happened to Fox 
Company. Munching on a bland, fast-energy bar that tasted as fine as a 
steak at that moment, I gave her my undivided attention (and a chocolate 
bar of her own). 

The situation had been as bad as I imagined. The assault simply fell 
apart. Seeing the zombies was enough—the guys didn’t even need flaming- 


snot demons to drive them off the deep end. Walking, staring, drooling, 
rotting human corpses proved sufficient to make them forget every combat 
lesson they’d ever learned. 

They went crazy; they broke ranks and charged the zombies. Fox was 
full of fighting spirit, all right; it just lacked a plan, strategy and tactics, a 
command structure, and a snowball’s chance in they-should-have-known- 
where as soon as they let themselves get isolated, cut off from each other. 
The fire-hocking spinys picked them off one at a time. 

I couldn’t really blame my buds. I’d had the same reaction, the same rage 
to rip the zombies apart with my bare hands. 

Arlene was saved because she wasn’t as affected by the male berserker 
fury. It must be a male thing; testosterone, maybe? Jesus, did that sour- 
lemon odor actually stimulate a testosterone and adrenal rush overdose? 

Then again, she might simply have had better selfcontrol than a guy. I 
interrupted to say, “You’re a better man than I am, Arlene.” 

““Shush, Fly, if you want to hear the rest of this.” I shushed. 

“T found a cupboard and hid out,’ she continued. “I could hear them 
moving just beyond the door. Sometimes hearing is worse than seeing.” 

I nodded at the truth of that observation. “Like this ugly demon,” I said, 
kicking the brown hide of the creature she’d dispatched. “They hiss like 
giant serpents. Scares the piss out of you in the dark.” 

She laughed. “I wouldn’t call that a demon! I’ve seen some others that 
more deserve the name.” 

“Yeah,” I agreed, remembering the minotaurs. “I guess those hell-princes 
you warned me about with your skull and crossbones are a more traditional 
demon design.” 

“T wouldn’t know,” she said. “I never saw them. You’re talking about the 
pentagram room?” 

“You didn’t see them?” 

“T put one foot into that room and heard one of ’em scream. I guess it 
saw me, but I didn’t stick around to see it! What do they look like?” 

“Fight feet tall, bright, flaming red, with goat legs and huge horns. They 
fire some sort of electrical-ball lightning from wrist-launchers.” 

She shook her head. “Nasty. But the thing I call a demon is a huge, 
bloated, pink thing with tusks. Maybe we should call it a pinkie?” 

“Does your pink demon make a pig sound?” 


The way she shuddered answered the question before she nodded. She 
wasn’t kidding about what you hear being worse than what you see. I didn’t 
press her for further details. I had a sinking feeling that no description was 
necessary. Before this was over, I imagined we’d be seeing lots worse 
nightmares, a full menagerie from the lowest pits of hell. 

“So what happened after you left me the warning?” 

She smiled, happy to oblige. “I ran like the devil.’ She interrupted 
herself, uncomfortable with the expression. The way things were going, 
there was no telling who we might meet next. “I ran,” she said, “and found 
the crack. I had enough paint stick left for a final warning. I want you to 
know, Fly Taggart, that taking the time for that Do Not Enter sign was the 
stupidest thing I did all day; while I was making like a public information 
booth, one of those hell-princes, as you call them, came tromping down the 
hall.” 

“You’ve got guts,” I piped in, and didn’t care if she shushed me this time. 
Instead, she insisted on my going back into the narrative and giving all the 
gory details of how close I’d come to cashing in when facing these 
monsters. 

Then she resumed: “While I was writing as fast as I could, I studied that 
crack in the wall, wishing I could make it larger.” 

“T couldn’t squeeze through.” 

“T know. I felt like dog dirt. But what could I do? I didn’t have a jaws 
with me, and no time to crank the crack wider even if I did have. I wormed 
my way through, leaving a few layers of skin behind, and hoofed it for the 
Gate.” 

She stopped to catch her breath. 

“You must have been surprised when you came through stripped bare,” I 
said. 

She sighed. “I was surprised to still be alive, which is how I’ve felt every 
leg of this mission. There was a corpse-reception committee waiting at the 
other end; but at least they weren’t zombies. While I picked my way 
through all those bodies, a metric ton of zombies started teleporting in. 
There were too many of them to handle—so I dived into that secret 
cupboard you found . . . and somebody pressed a switch, and the freaking 
door slammed shut! And then you showed up, looking . . ”,—she struggled 
for words—“not a helluva lot better than the zombies, Fly.” 


“Thanks,” I said. She always had a knack for compliments. 

Sometimes I suspected she liked toying with me. I pointed at the brown 
carcass of a spiny. “So if you don’t want me calling it a demon,” I said, 
“how about a spiny?” 

“How about an imp?” 

“An imp?” 

“Why not? I had a book of fairy tales when I was a kid with goblins and 
things. The picture closest to this critter had the caption ‘imp.’ It was 
playing with magical fire.” 

Our game was becoming fun. We didn’t have a lot of entertainment at 
the moment. “I dunno,’ I said. “Something about the head reminds me of an 
old monster movie about a fish-guy who lived in a lagoon.” 

“He’s an imp,” she insisted, reminding me that tough Marine or not, she 
was still a woman. 

My mother didn’t raise any fools. “He’s an imp,’ I agreed. 

“We should name the others, too,’ she said, encouraged. “We’ve got 
zombies, imps, demons or pinkies, and hell-princes. What do we call the 
rest?” 

I laughed. “That’s pretty biblical, isn’t it?” 

She stared blankly. Not everyone had enjoyed the benefits of religious 
schooling. “Anyway, it’s a great idea, Arlene. If we ever find a functional 
radio, we’ll need to report to someone. We might as well play Adam and 
Eve and name all the beasts.” 

She relaxed, convinced now that I wasn’t making fun of her, so I 
continued. “One of these imps talked to me—” I started, but Arlene cut me 
off. 

“Talked?” This was the most surprised I’d seen her yet We hadn’t exactly 
duplicated each other’s adventures. 

“He tried to get me to surrender, promising if I did, I wouldn’t be 
reworked—uh, zombiefied. But the son of a bitch was such a lar, I 
wouldn’t trust him for the time with a clock stuck to his face.” 

The way she laughed made me laugh. Finding her had changed 
everything. I wanted to live now as well as fight, report back to Mars or to 
Earth, do my duty for the survival of homo sap, the home team. 

“Are those all the monsters we’ve discovered so far?” she asked. 


“No,” I admitted. “There’s something around here that’s partly invisible. 
I was thinking of them as killer ghosts.” 

“Specters,” she corrected offhand. If we got out of this alive, I would 
recommend Arlene for the job of an editor. On a religious magazine. I had a 
sense of justice. “I haven’t run into them yet,’ she added. 

“And some flying skulls. What should we call those?” 

“Flying skulls.” 

“Right. What do you want to call them?” 

“Flying skulls, you lamebrain! Call ’em as you see ’em.” 

I found out she hadn’t run into any of the mysterious blue spheres, either, 
so far the only good thing to come out of the Gate. I had the feeling that 
before this was over, there would be much more of the naming of names. 

Now it was back to business. Lunchtime was over. 

It was a brief rest; we needed real sleep. We needed to find somewhere 
secure so that we could take turns sleeping and watch-standing. And we 
needed real food. 

“Something feels weird about this place,’ she said. Something about 
Deimos was creepier than Phobos. The place was colder, but that wasn’t it. 
The odors were about the same, but a bad taste seemed to go with it. Maybe 
we were closer to the source of the sour-lemon stench that hung around the 
zombies. Whatever it was, a cloying odor underrode everything, something 
very slowly rotting. 

“T hate looking at it,’ I answered her. If lesser demons were in charge of 
the other Martian moon, then Old Nick himself had drawn the blueprint 
here. The skulls were starting to get on my nerves. They were everywhere, 
all different sizes and shapes, always more evil than a normal human skull. 

As we explored, the color we noticed most was red, darkening into the 
shade of rare steak. The little voice wanted to know why it wasn’t getting 
hotter. Red was hot. Hell was supposed to be hot. 

The floor became moist with the hated ooze, not yet deep enough to 
require slogging through a river of the stuff. I wondered if Arlene and I 
were exploring the great intestine of something so gigantic that I was going 
to have a hard time ripping out its guts. 

It seemed like the deeper we went into hell, the closer we got to the life 
force. Screw that. The Martian moons were more appealing as desolate 
rocks exposed to the cold of space. 


“Bad news,’ said Arlene, pointing at a teleport platform at the end of a 
corridor. We had no choice: use it or go back. Along with all the normal 
maps I wanted, I now wished for a map showing where all these grids 
connected up. How many shopping days before Christmas? 

“Somebody’s got to do it, Arlene.” 

“Do what?” 

“Recon these teleport things.” 

She placed a firm hand on my shoulder, “Nice of you o volunteer, 
Corporal. Rank before beauty.” 

“Pearls before swine. I was about to delegate, PFC 
“The layout’s different here than on Phobos.” 

Looking back, I observed the vista of emptiness we had walked through 
to get to this point. I had the feeling that the walls were squirming when I 
didn’t look at them. 

“More dead ends. I don’t like jumping into a fire when I’m getting fat 
and happy in the frying pan. But we’re humanity’s vanguard, right?” It 
sounded sarcastic, but I didn’t mean it to be. “We’ve got to find out what’s 
happened and communicate with someone up the chain.” 

Whenever Arlene smiled, it felt warmer, nicer, than when we’d just been 
palling around. War brings out something good in a certain kind of person. I 
didn’t know about me, but I was sure about Arlene. 

“Besides,” she elaborated, “best way to stay alive is to be on the offense. 
I’m coming right behind you.” There was no one I’d rather have backing me 
up. 

“Give me thirty seconds.” They wouldn’t be my famous last words, I 
hoped. 

The teleporter sensation, now that I was ready for it, was similar to the 
Gate, but quicker, less disorienting. My clothes stayed on and the weapons 
didn’t disappear. I was ready to secure the beachhead. 

I'd arrived on a platform virtually identical to the one at point of 
departure. I should have jumped off right away, but I was distracted by the 
sound of heavy pile drivers, coming closer and closer. Jesus and Mary, I 
realized, they’re footsteps! 


17? 


I looked around. 


18 


Abruptly, I remembered where I stood. I leapt off the platform just 
in time; Arlene had counted the full thirty seconds before following. 

“Clear?” she asked as she sparkled into view. 

“No,” I answered. “Listen to that.’ Light as a cat, she pounced down 
beside me. The thudding sound wasn’t getting any softer. 

“Poke your head around the corner,’ she suggested. “I have a pretty good 
idea what’s making all that racket.” 

We took our time approaching the corner. Arlene gestured that she would 
go first. I don’t argue with a lady. When she glanced back at me, her face 
was stern. “You’ve been wondering what I call a demon,’ she said. “So take 
a good look.” 

I did. And as Gunny Goforth might have said, she wasn’t just a-whistlin’ 
Dixie. 

A whole box of demons marched around atop a two-story platform that 
looked as though it might lower any moment. One of the “‘pinkies”’ started 
making those pig sounds I found so disgusting. But as I paid close attention 
to the anatomical details of this thing, I decided the Porker Anti-Defamation 
League might disagree with my description. 

These monsters were the most massively concentrated collections of 
muscle power in the whole zoo. They were about six feet tall, with mouths 
that looked like they could swallow Cleveland . . . and probably had. They 
were demons, all right. She had me there. So long as these guys were 
wandering the corridors, nothing else deserved the name. Their flesh was a 
dark pink; Arlene’s nickname for them was accurate. 

They didn’t see us yet; but it didn’t look as if we’d be going anywhere if 
we didn’t deal with them. There were no other doors; eventually, that 
platform would have to lower so we could ride it up. 


They stamped around on short, stubby legs, like shaved gorillas with 
horns and saw teeth. “Do they have any projectiles?” I asked Arlene. 

“What do you mean?” 

“Fireballs, lightning, anything like that?” 

“They don’t throw anything at you.” She noticed my body relax a little. 
“Don’t let it fool you,’ she warned. “They’re deadly if you get anywhere 
near them.” 

“Can we pop them from down here?” I asked. 

“Not likely. You need concentrated force, like a .458 Weatherby or a 
twelve-gauge at ten feet. I saw an imp go after a demon, and the pinkie took 
three fireballs in the face and swallowed the imp whole! It burped out the 
bloody spines.” 

Data point: imps and demons, like imps and zombies, don’t get along. 

“Fly, if we’re going to progress, we’ve got to lower that platform. 
There’s no other way to kill them with what we’ve got.” 

I noticed I’'d been leaning against something hard and metallic. It was 
another skull switch, just begging to be flicked. I started reaching for it but 
Arlene butted my hand away with her shotgun. That hurt. 

“You don’t know what that’s going to do,’ she protested. 

“T can’t help it... ’'m a born lever-puller.” I flicked the tongue. With a 
loud groan, the platform lowered like an elevator. The demons wandered 
off. They snuffled their pig snouts and evidently scented us, for they made a 
beeline. 

As they came for us, we scutted back around the corner. The demons 
didn’t seem able to run, but they could power-walk with that thud-thud-thud 
pounding through our skulls. 

Arlene and I both had shotguns and a serious attitude problem toward 
demons. I found their open mouths an irresistible target. The first one ate 
my powder, and the back of its head opened up like a watermelon. There is 
always something to say for close range. Arlene took hers out with a well- 
placed blast to the chest. 

If we were acting like a team with our backs to the wall, the pinkies were 
dying as individuals, marching forward two abreast to receive their quota of 
shotgun death. The corpses piled up, providing sufficient time for us to 
reload and do it again. 


As an added bonus, none of the monsters made that snuffling pig sound. 
They were too busy roaring as they died. The roaring was loud, but it was 
the mark of their defeat. I started feeling good about my bloody work. 

“Like shooting drunks in a barrel,” I said to Arlene. 

“Don’t get cocky!” 

She was right. Hubris. 

The ranks of the enemy finally diminished. We’d stumbled into a finite 
number and we were using up our demons fast . . . about as fast as our 
shotgun shells. 

“Don’t discount them,” Arlene warned me. I wasn’t about to discount her 
experiences. “So long as you can keep them at a safe distance, this is all 
right. But I saw what happened when a buddy got his arm bitten off; and 
then it ate his head. He avoided being a zombie, only to wind up as demon 
food.” 

Good things come to an end, even in a paradise like Deimos. A bullet 
came very close to ending the career of Yours Truly. This tipped me off that 
someone was shooting at me. 

“Look out!” I shouted at Arlene; but she was already down, crouching 
behind the wall of demon bodies. 

During the precious seconds I spent saving myself from whoever was 
playing sniper, the last demon charged like a runaway bulldozer. I turned to 
find myself staring into a meter-wide maw. 

I thought I knew what a bad smell was before that moment. A square 
mile of human cesspool might come close. The odor was so bad it was like 
a weapon. My eyes watered so I could hardly see. 

Arlene shouted something, but I couldn’t make out her words. She was 
busy with problems of her own; the sniper was still at it. 

One of those bullets, clearly meant for Arlene or me, connected with the 
back of the demon. It had the same reaction as a human being would 
have .. . if stung by a mosquito. While it tried to scratch at its back (and I 
wondered how it could accomplish such a task without ripping itself to 
ribbons), I swung the shotgun back into action. The target came forward, 
and the bore of my weapon literally went down its gaping maw. I pulled the 
trigger. 

My eyes filled with stinking monster blood; not a desirable state of 
affairs when trying to avoid the persistent rifleman. I could hear Arlene, 


though, shouting, ““That’s the last of them,” as her shotgun finished speaking 
for her. She had to be speaking about the demons. I could still hear the ping- 
ping of rifle fire over my head. But it was a relief to know that no pinkish 
mouths would chew my tender epidermis. 

Arlene crawled over to me and started rubbing the blood out of my eyes. 
I could manage that on my own. I just hadn’t gotten around to it. “Spread 
out,’ I ordered, “don’t make one target!” 

She didn’t argue with my superior combat experience. She rolled away 
without a word while I finished clearing my vision. Whoever was trying to 
shoot us had taken a break, probably just to reload. I was certain it wouldn’t 
last; he had the high ground, beyond where the platform had been. We 
needed to alter the situation in our favor immediately. 

“Platform!” I shouted, then charged the lowered lift. It had its own 
switch, which I flipped. The lift started up, and Arlene finally realized what 
was happening. She ran and leapt, barely catching the edge. I pulled her up; 
we crouched back-to-back and took a little trip. 

On the next level, we rounded a corner and came face-to-, well, you 
couldn’t call it a face really—we ran right into another demon. I didn’t 
know about Arlene, but I found the situation very annoying. We’d just been 
through all that. We were so close that, as it charged, I fell back on my butt 
and fired a round between his legs. This staggered the demon, and Arlene 
finished the job, plugging it head-on and killing it good and proper. 

Now we could return to the more traditional task of trying to find out 
who was shooting at us. 

Past the platform we saw two doors. Exchanging glances, we 
approached. One had a blue border and the other had a red border. Of 
course, they were both locked. I missed my rockets. 

I extracted my blue key card and inserted it into the proper slot, swiping 
it across the mag reader. 

The door opened with a clean, whistling, hydraulic sound. At the other 
end was a teleport. Deimos had a “thing” for teleports, all right. 

“The lady or the tiger?” asked Arlene. 

“What?” 

“A story I read once. We’ve got a red door and a teleport. Which one?” 

“Yeah, too bad we don’t have a red key.” 


“Hell, Fly, all you had to do was ask!” She produced a key card and 
presented it to me. Arlene liked to play when working. “I found it in the 
secret room while waiting for you to rescue me,” she said with a wink. 

“T’ll pick the lady,” I said, and started to insert the red Key. 

Marine training comes in handy. I heard something on the other side of 
the door; and there was nothing wrong with Arlene’s ears, either. I swiped 
the key through the slot, then skipped to the side, scattergun ready. Arlene 
took the opposite side. 

The moment the door opened, she discharged a shell, killing a zombie on 
the other side. He was holding a shotgun just like ours. He wasn’t the 
sniper. The zombie standing next to him had a Sig-Cow, and I wasted him. 
We cleared the room, each covering 270 degrees. 

The room was really more of a walk-in closet. It was empty of more 
zombies. But I was already worried about something else: if the one with 
the rifle had been shooting at us, then had ducked in here, it had all the 
signs of an ambush. But zombies didn’t think! An ambush suggested 
tactical thinking . . . thinking! 

I hadn’t yet had an opportunity to confide in Arlene my suspicions of an 
overall Mind guiding the invasion, using a great number of mindless 
opponents against a few human survivors to learn our limits. 

She probably wasn’t in the mood for a quiet, analytical discussion right 
then. There was too much blood on her, on me. 

Now it was the lady’s turn to find a switch. The room was flooded with 


clean, white light. We had found a treasure chamber . . . medical supplies, 
more com-rats, and ammunition, lots of it. Best of all was another of those 
handheld video things. 


“Fly, you know what this is?” exclaimed Arlene in excitement. I let her 
tell me. “It’s a computer map of the entire floor plan!” 

The medical supplies allowed me to return the “favor” Arlene had done 
me. She’d been winged by the sniper. She wasn’t carrying any bullets 
around with her, but one had grazed her shoulder. And she had other cuts 
and bruises from our last battle. 

“T’m your doctor now,’ I said. 

Eyeing the self-heating tins of food and coffee, she sized me up through 
slitted eyes and said, “I’d rather you were the cook.” 

“Chef,” I corrected her. “And what’s the difference, anyway?” 


“Between a cook and a chef?” 

“No, between a doctor and a cook!” 

“You win. Feed me, Fly.” 

I bit my tongue. “Doctoring first.’ She didn’t argue, but continued 
working on the computer map as I tended her wounds. I found a tube of the 
same cream she’d used on me; but she didn’t grimace. I used the hypo to 
inject the antiviral; but she never flinched. She really was a better man than 
I. 

We didn’t have any disagreement until I insisted we get some sleep. 
“You've got to be kidding, Fly. I’m not about to close my eyes and lie down 
in a rotting pile of zombie corpses!” 

“We can carry them out and pile them in front of the door.” 

“Oh, great—an announcement that we’re in here.” 

“All right. Il throw them onto the last teleport platform.” 

“We’ll throw them.” As simple as that, sweet reason had prevailed. 

The job took twenty minutes. We didn’t bother with the teleporter; we 
spread them like speed bumps among the demons. Maybe visitors would 
think they had killed each other. 

Then we enjoyed our first real meal together. The snack had only kept us 
going; this was a veritable feast by comparison. 

I insisted that she sleep first. She’d been on the go longer than I. While I 
was still being nursemaided by the Rons, she was at risk, in battle, up to her 
eyeballs in demon guts. She would sleep first, whatever it took. 

Turned out all it took was getting her to put her head down “just for a 
moment.” I let her sleep for four. 

When it was my turn, I went out like a drained tallboy. She woke me 
with a gentle hand on my shoulder and a beautiful face to appreciate. We’d 
both been too exhausted for nightmares. We were living them. 

I hated to leave that room. The same way Id felt about the Phobos lab 
infirmary. No, that was wrong. This room was better than that. I’d shared 
the time with a woman whose survival turned my universe from empty 
muck back into gold. 

Blinking away pieces of sleep, I slung the Sig-Cow across my back and 
we returned to the blue door and again faced the teleporter. “Same routine 
as last time?” I asked. 

“Nah. Let’s go together.” 


“Why not?” 

‘What the hell.” 

We found ourselves in a room with no doors, no windows, and one of 
Arlene’s big, pink demons. 

“Mine,” I called, and pounded a shell before Arlene could argue. 

“T have a feeling there’s plenty to go around,” she said. 

I was almost starting to like the pink bastards. Their lack of projectile 
weaponry made them favorites in my book. Of course, I hadn’t seen them 
chow-down on a comrade the way Arlene had. 

I took point, positively greedy for my next demon kill. I moved well 
ahead of Arlene. 

Oh, Fly. Hubris, hubris, hubris! Pride goeth before destruction, and a 
haughty spirit before a fall. 

Turning one of those treacherous corners so common in both Phobos and 
Deimos, I stepped right into The Wizard of Oz. What else could you call a 
giant, floating head? 


19 


This head wasn’t handsome enough to be a movie star. Its 
grotesque skin was made of millions of squirming, knotted, bloodred worms 
stretched over a huge, inflated balloon. For an instant I thought of the 
floating blue sphere. 

Staring into the single red eye of this floating pumpkin with a tube for a 
mouth, I doubted it would make me feel like a million . . . years old, maybe. 

I dived sideways as the pumpkin spit a ball of lightning out the tube 
mouth, burning my scalp and hair as it sailed past. It exploded against the 
wall, producing a million slivers of blue-flickering electricity that had every 
hair on any part of my body standing at attention. 

“Mary, Mother of God!” I cried. “Another one that shoots stuff!” 

I ran back toward Arlene, shouting, “Run, run, run!” With pain and 
surprise still fresh, I couldn’t think of anything else to do. 

But the floating head hadn’t been in Arlene’s face; she was still in 
control. The red ball floated around the corner, and she let it have a blast 
from behind. 

It rebounded from the blast, roaring in pain, then slowly turned to face 
her. While it did, I caught hold of myself. 

I blasted the floating pumpkin from my angle. As it turned back to me, 
Arlene skated to the side and blasted it again. 

Now we both knew what to do. We dropped naturally into a standard 
Light Drop tactic—move, fire, move again, fire again. The ball did a lot of 
bouncing. Whatever life force kept it going hadn’t left it yet. But we kept 
firing. 

Then it died the messiest monster death I had seen so far. One moment 
the ball was bouncing against the walls; the next, there came a spray of 
sticky, blue goo that smelled like caramelized pumpkin pie and sounded like 


an Overripe squash dropped ten stories. I seriously considered losing the 
lunch I had struggled so hard to ingest. 

“Oo-rah!” exulted Arlene. “Smashing pumpkins into small pieces of 
putrid debris! What the hell was that?” 

“Um. I was going to ask you the same question.” 

I couldn’t take my eyes off the disgusting, deflated remains. We should 
have been expecting brand new monsters, but this floating beach-ball thing 
was So weird, it meant anything was possible. 

That scared the hell out of me. It meant we might run into something 
indestructible, or at least unkillable. 

“What, ah, do you want to call this one?” Arlene asked. 

I'd forgotten our little game. It was a good question, but my mind was 
blank. “Call it a pumpkin,” I suggested at last. 

Arlene wasn’t impressed. She wrinkled her nose as if smelling limburger 
cheese. “I didn’t mean that as a serious name, Fly. We need something 
more... frightening.” 

“All right, then, you name it.” 

“No dice, Fly. First person who sees a monster has to name it. That’s the 
rule.” 

I was about to demand to know why she got to make the rules; I stifled 
myself in time. Of course she made the rules—she was the female. 

“Then it’s a pumpkin, Arlene.” I put my foot down. Maybe Ill get lucky 
and she'll dislike my name enough that the rule will change. 

We secured the corridor. It was monster-free. It wasn’t ooze-free, but the 
stuff didn’t look deep until pretty far along. Ahead lay a small ocean of the 
stuff with an exit at the other end. 

“Best way to get through shallow goo is jogging,” she said. “Eats away 
your boots, but you last longer.” 

“Sure beats swimming in it,’ I agreed. 

“Don’t be silly. That would kill you.” 

I made a mental note to brag to Arlene about my swim. 

I searched the immediate vicinity for any life-giving blue spheres, but we 
were alone in the sea of green. “So what does your computer map say?” 

Arlene zoomed the room we were in, and we noticed a couple of 
switches and a teleporter. 


We threw the first switch, and stairs slid into view like shark fins rising 
from a tranquil sea. We hoofed it to the next switch, then went straight to 
the teleporter. We did not pass GO, we did not collect 200 monsters. 

“My turn to go first,’ she declared; I knew better than to argue. 

“ll count to thirty.” 

Her trim form faded from view, and I started the count. “. . . Twenty- 
eight, twenty-nine, thirty.” 

Weapon up, I followed, ready for almost anything—except what I 
actually saw: a whole bank of shiny, new, undamaged radios! “Bank is 
open,” said Arlene. 

“T guess they missed this room,” I said, checking the corners for possible 
ambush. There was nowhere to hide, and we seemed to be alone; but I 
didn’t let down my guard. The invisible ghosts were reason enough not to 
completely trust the old eyeballs. 

Arlene fired up one of the radios then whooped for joy when it hummed 
and came on-line. But no matter what frequency she typed, we heard 
nothing but crashing-ocean static. 

Arlene took her time, running carefully by five megahertz jumps up the 
entire spectrum; then she tried the same procedure with different radios. 
The results were the same. 

“Fly, this doesn’t make sense,” she said finally. 

“They couldn’t be blocking the signal somehow?” I asked. 

“These antennas stick half a kilometer off the surface of Deimos! 
Whatever’s blanking the signal must be enveloping the entire moon.” 

Time to put on the thinking cap. I even paced. “Arlene,” I said at last, 
“every radio I came across on Phobos was smashed.” 

“Same with me.” 

“Now here is a vitally important communications room that they 
couldn’t possibly miss. . .” 

“You're assuming an intelligent enemy here,” she said. 

“There has to be, Arlene! Phobos and Deimos are part of the same 
invasion. Why leave this room intact, but not the ones on Phobos?” 

“Fly, Deimos was abandoned four years ago. I was present when the 
Marines picked up everything and left. Budget cuts, reduction in force, and 
a lack of tactical imagination sent us packing.” 


I nodded, sitting on the floor with my back to the wall, at an angle where 
I had an unobstructed view of the door. “A big mistake,” I said. 

She was on a roll: “What if the aliens invaded back then? Or some time 
ago—weeks, months, or longer. They could take their time spreading 
through the facility . . . and there’d be no reason to smash the radios here on 
alien-controlled Deimos.” 

We listened to the symphony of white noise. “So why can’t we reach 
anyone now, Arlene?” 

When enough crazy stuff happens all at once, the imagination is free to 
float off like that damned pumpkin. I didn’t know if it was inspiration or 
not, but I asked the trillion-dollar question: “Maybe Deimos is no longer in 
orbit around Mars?” 

I was so used to the way she liked to watch me through slitted eyes that 
when she stared at me wide-eyed, she looked like a different person. “I 
never thought of that,” she said. “It would explain Deimos vanishing from 
the screens. I just assumed it was destroyed somehow.” 

Having started down the twisting path, I ran to keep up. “You said 
Deimos is so small that gravitational effects are negligible. It’s more like a 
giant spaceship than a planet.” 

We stared at each other. Inspiration can be catching. “But how do you 
remove an entire moon instantaneously,’ she mused, “even one as small as 
Deimos?” 

I don’t spend all my time on target practice and working out; sometimes 
I read. “By shifting it into a different dimension?” 

She smiled. “Fly, you’ve been watching too many sci-fi trideos.” 

“T don’t know about that, A.S.; but special F/X will never be convincing 
again after facing the real thing.” 

“What makes you think we’ll ever see another movie?” Neither of us 
spoke for a bit; then Arlene continued. 

“So suppose they’ve turned Deimos into a giant spaceship,” she said. 
“Where would they be taking us? Back to their home world?” 

“With us as prime specimens?’ I said, not feeling the least bit 
comfortable about the idea. “Whatever the destination, I’ve got a bad 
feeling about this.” 

“Any destination is probably bad for us,” she agreed. 

‘“‘We could be in some kind of artificial wormhole on the way to hell.” 


“As if this weren’t hell already! Besides, I’m not religious, Fly; I didn’t 
go to any parochial school.” 

My mind’s eye conjured up old images from the Chapel of Mary and 
Martha. Sister Lucrezia, who taught us Dante’s Inferno, acted as if she’d 
just returned from a special tourist-class trip through the infernal regions 
and couldn’t wait to share her Bad News for Modern Man. One July 
weekend at Saint Malachi Summer Camp, I saw her in full regalia, standing 
up in a rowboat and pushing off from the dock with a long oar. I thought I'd 
seen a vision of Charon the Boatman, ferrying lost souls across the River 
Styx. I doubt any monster here could beat her out for the job. 

I was half convinced I was already on a one-way trip to the real place. 
But the idea that Arlene was coming along drove me mad with anger. I 
wasn’t about to let one stinking demon-claw touch that noble soul of hers. 

Arlene stood up from the useless radios. “I’ve been trying to get a fix on 
the enemy, some handle; but all I’m doing is drawing blanks. I’ve had the 
experience of running down corridors before,’ she confided, “with dozens 
of armed men out for my blood. Sometimes your best chance for survival is 
to go right into the rooms and corridors they hold and destroy whatever they 
came for. We made our way into the embassy vault and burned all our 
important documents . . . and the KPLA left. You know what I’m talking 
about?” 

“T’m glad you got out of there, A.S. It was a real hellhole.” 

“Yeah, I wouldn’t miss this hell pit for the world.” 

I stared at the radios myself. Yep . . . that’s a radio, all right, I thought, 
which is about as far as my education in electronic communications gear 
went. 

Why on Earth—on Deimos—would the Corps give up such a strategic 
position as this station? By Executive Order number whatever, the Marines 
had military jurisdiction on all extraterrestrial planetary surfaces; the Navy 
had deep space; the Air Force had atmospheric; and the Army had Earth 
itself. 

Mars, Phobos, and Deimos were surely ours to the bone. The only reason 
I could imagine us giving it up was if the other services conspired to cut our 
space-ops budget . . . with pretty disastrous consequences. Wonder if 
anybody felt shame about that, or would if we lived to tell anyone? 

“Round of ammo for your thoughts,” she said. 


“Nothing important. Politics back on the old home planet.” 

“At least there’s no politics here. Unless you count that swastika.” 

“You saw it, too?” I was beginning to wonder if I’d dreamed that damned 
crooked cross. “That’s not politics; it’s a bad joke.” 

“You think they put it there to scare us, huh? The way they—what do 
you call it? rework—the physical buildings gives me the creeps.” 

“Nothing from Earth scares me after what I’ve seen, Arlene. What’s 
next, a hammer and sickle?” 

“A what?” 

“Never mind. You’re too young to remember. I’!] make you a bet that we 
don’t find any other symbols from the home planet.” 

We shook hands. “You'll lose,” she said. “You are thinking too much 
about politics. I win if we find any symbols, including religious symbols . . . 
and there’ve been plenty enough of those.” 

“Damn, you're right. I lose. All the Satan stuff.” 

She could sound like a professor when she wanted to: “Maybe the 
demons—the aliens—were confused by Hollywood into thinking the 
swastika is a satanic symbol. It sure seems suspiciously like somebody had 
an official list of Things that Scare Westerners . . . like they knew it would 
be seen by UAC workers and Marines, not by Native American Indians or 
Japanese. Wonder if they’d change the symbols for different humans, say 
using the letters kyo or oni if they were invading the Nippon Electric space 
station? 

“In any case, the religious symbols are terrestrial, so you lose, Corporal.” 

Now it was my turn to grin. “Well, Arlene, if you are going to lose a bet, 
it’s good to find out before you set the amount.” She gave me a playful 
punch in the shoulder. We started out while I massaged the numbness out of 
my arm. At the next inverted cross we passed, I’d pay anything she wanted. 
Within reason. 


20 


The video map showed us how to get to the central elevator for all 
of the Deimos installation. We were very near. All that separated us from 
our goal was a wall. 

The wall had a switch, a full-body bas relief of a cloven-hoofed alien. 
And it wasn’t his tongue that required flicking. 

My face flushed. “Um, you’d better take this one, PFC Sanders. 

“And here I thought you were a born lever-puller.’ Arlene flicked the 
switch; the blue-gray wall cranked down into a slit in the floor, revealing a 
spacious lift. “Deluxe service,’ Arlene said, pointing at the labeled bank of 
elevator buttons. We’d made it through the Containment Area. Below us 
was the Refinery, then Deimos Lab, the Command Center, the Central Hall, 
and three levels below that which were unlabeled. 

“Basement? Skip the crap?” I said. 

“Hm. Yeah, well, maybe.” 

“Maybe? Makes sense to me. Every time that door slides open, we run 
the risk of being stormed by giant vampire slugs from the planet Pomos, or 
being machine-gunned to death by Nazi schutzstaffel.” 

“Fly, these lifts didn’t work too well even back when we had people 
maintaining them! They got stuck all the time. If the sensors detected 
anything in the shaft, you stopped at the floor above. If a door was open 
somewhere, the whole elevator could freeze. Go ahead and push the 
basement button . . . Pll bet you a month’s pay we won’t make it more than 
a couple of levels; then we’ll have to find another lift somewhere.” 

I looked at her and snorted. “You’re so full of good cheer. Well, ready or 
not, here goes nothing.” 

Here went nothing, all right. 

I pushed the button; we started with a jerk and ground downward, 
skewing back and forth dangerously. As we descended toward the refinery, I 


saw that the lift didn’t take us there directly, but to a warehouse section 
we’d have to pass through first. In the distance we had an actual view of the 
refinery through large, gaping holes in the floors and ceilings. Some kind of 
fighting had gone on here. 

We had descended some fifty meters. What we could see of the refinery 
was laid out like an open maze; it was possible to see in the distance an 
expanse of pink, moving objects that looked like fleshy cubes or blocks. I 
hoped they weren’t alive, weren’t the next creatures on the hit parade. They 
were gigantic, reminding me of the “organic ladder” and the pulsing walls 
back on Phobos. Then we’d moved past the point where we could see the 
refinery. Our descent brought us to a more normal scene. 

“Normal” in this case meant a warehouse area stuffed with UAC boxes 
to the height of twelve feet or more and so densely packed as to create their 
own pseudocorridors. We’d noticed a number of humanoid figures with the 
familiar brown hide and white spikes scurrying for cover . . . back in imp 
country again. 

The lift stopped, not quite all the way to the floor; we had to jump down 
about three meters. 

Arlene peeked over the edge. “You owe me a month’s pay, Corporal 
Flaggart.” 

“Did I take the bet? I don’t recall saying any such thing.” 

“Native American giver.” 

We hopped out onto the ugliest, puke-green marble I'd ever seen; but it 
was still good to have something solid underfoot. 

“All right, PFC Sanders, let’s do this by the numbers.” 

“Sure, Fly. So which box is number one? And how come we never do 
stuff by the letters?” I threw her a withering glance, like an older brother to 
a pesky sister. We were ready to rock and roll. 

Fighting demons had spoiled me. I liked an enemy that didn’t shoot 
back. We popped through the warehouse like nobody’s business, pulse 
galloping, keyed to instant reaction. The refinery had its share of toxic ooze. 
We didn’t pay it any mind, but so far, there were only a few sticky regions 
instead of slime beach. I looked for barrels of the stuff, my favorite way of 
dealing with imps; but there were none. 

The first fireball missed us by a country klick. The second came too 
close to Arlene to suit me, so after I killed the imp, I wasted ammo . . . and 


killed him again to teach him a lesson. They were smart enough to duck in 
and out of the natural defenses provided by the stacked boxes, but not 
enough to gang up on us or show any other sign of working together. None 
of these guys were talking. 

Still, there were a lot more of them than there were of us. One almost got 
me from behind. If he’d had a partner, ’'d have been dead meat. Instead, 
Arlene slid in behind the both of us and used her bayonet like a can opener. 
Busy as I was staying alive, I could appreciate the sheer grace of Arlene, 
back to the wall of boxes, cradling her shotgun like a baby; never mind dogs 
as “man’s best friend.” 

With hand gestures I indicated who would take which section. Another 
fifteen minutes and we were back in the same place. She’d killed more than 
I had. The warehouse area had been cleared. 

I was tired enough to wish one of those magical blue spheres would 
make an appearance. I hadn’t told her about that because it seemed too 
unbelievable, even in a place like this. But Arlene the mind reader had 
brought a small black case back with her. It looked medical. I’d have to start 
calling her “Doc.” 

Opening it, she produced a syringe filled with clear liquid, labeled 
“cardiac augmentation stimulation unit.” I held it for a second, then 
carefully passed it back to her as if it were a loaded weapon. 

“Can’t believe I found this,” she said. “It’s synthetic adrenaline to be 
used on patients who are in the throes of cardiac arrest.” 

“What would it do to you or me?” 

She paused, biting her lip again. “In a normal person, the adrenaline rush 
would make you super strong. There’s a drawback, though; it could also 
give you tachycardia and kill you.” 

“Just say no to having an edge,’ I commented, taking the black package 
and its contents and adding it to my collection. 

“Fly, maybe we should toss it. That stuff could be too much of a 
temptation.” 

“Hey, if push comes to shove, we can inject one of them with it, right up 
their monster fundaments. All in the interests of science.” 

The only unlocked door led to a huge, green marble chamber with a 
collection of weird, red pillars. Pulsing veins stretched around these pillars 
like living ropes. The sharp, cloying odor of perspiration combined with the 


sick-sweet stench of rotting meat. Mechanical stuff was fine with me, even 
organic stuff like the arboretum. But I didn’t like it when they combined, 
and I couldn’t tell where one part left off and the other began. The 
throbbing of the veins matched the throbbing in my head. 

I was almost grateful for the appearance of a number of imps. At least 
they took my mind off the architecture. Then some more imps . . . and some 
more after that. Too much of a good thing. 

“Check your six, Fly,” said Arlene. 

I looked behind me, across the room; sure enough, even more snot- 
spitting spinys. 

My gratitude faded fast. I made out a dozen imps. 

I started the donnybrook with a well-aimed shell; between their fireballs 
and our shotguns, we had one serious firelight. I thought the pillars would 
catch fire, so thick were the red flames and black smoke. 

I killed two. Arlene killed three. The survivors were better than the 
previous imps at dodging behind the pillars, and even our shotgun extender 
mags were running dry. They forced us back into a corner, pinning us down. 
Mexican standoff time. I wanted to bail. 

Then I pumped, and the slide locked! Nothing up my sleeve; nothing in 
my gun. 

Now what? 

Time to even the odds. Arlene was watching the imps, firing off a shot 
now and then, looking down at her mag window and frowning. 

I reached inside my vest, pulled a hypodermic and _ studied it. 
Intravenous? No, intramuscular. Well, that was easier, at least. But could I 
actually do it? To myself? Jesus, what a dilemma. 

For a moment it was like being back on Phobos. That needle bothered 
me more than flaming mucus in my face. Without question, the next 
scientific revolution should move beyond the need for needles. But more 
important, could I risk a heart attack if I had a bad reaction? 

Jesus, Mary, and Joseph, I’m a Marine! Semper fi, Mac. I gave myself 
the shot. 

At first, nothing; then the stuff stimulated my adrenal glands; and in a 
minute I was filled with red rage! The world turned crimson and my breath 
was fire. My heart beat so fast that it spun in my chest like a gyroscope. I 


drew my bayonet from my webbing and bolted from the corner; if Arlene 
yelled after me, I didn’t hear it. 

All that mattered was to kill, getting in tight and cutting the steak. 
Blood-rare—God, how I loved imp blood, thick as red ink from a shattered 
paint stick, communion wine splashing on the floors of eternity. 

Every motion was a target to strike. Flesh was too easy. Bone was the 
real work, the blade sticking in the cartilage, the cracking and crunching 
inspiring me to greater efforts. I hardly noticed the blood splashing in my 
eyes. The world was already a red haze; liquid salt was trivial pain as I 
swung my blade in the center of adrenal agony. 

The more I killed, the heavier the weight in my arms. But exhaustion 
spurred me to greater fury. I no longer saw the Chinese-mask faces of the 
imps, only a blur. Their claws rent my flesh, but we were too tight for them 
to use their best weapon. 

Dimly I realized that I was bleeding from many wounds. That was fine 
with me. Blood kept me warm, theirs, mine, anyone’s . . . just so that I 
could continue to swing a blade and slay the bastards. Motion must be met 
with motion. 

An imp exploded in front of me before I could even reach it. Only one 
imp left now. 

“Fly!” A voice called my name, near at hand. I hadn’t expected any of 
these imps to speak, especially not in a high, almost feminine voice, calling 
my name. I was so surprised that I hesitated for a moment, blade poised 
over the last imp. 

“Fly!” 

My vision began to clear. My arm was a bar of lead, my chest a sharp 
pain, as the old heart slowed to merely fast. The fury slowly lifted from me 
like a thick, red, trideo theater curtain drawing back. The hazy shape before 
me grew solid and took on familiar features, Arlene’s features. 

I was very glad that I hadn’t killed that last imp. 


21 


They’re all dead,” she reported. “Are you all right, Fly?” 

“Thirsty,” I croaked. My own canteen had split open during the fight, 
spilling its contents. She shared water from her supplies. 

“Better?” she asked. 

I nodded, utterly spent. 

I almost fell as she helped me out of the room. She set me down, held 
my arm. My mind still raced, but my body was exhausted. 

Arlene made me rest twenty minutes, then reluctantly helped me up so 
we could move on. 

We walked past the secure area, beyond the pillar room, and faced 
another closed door. It was hardly worth kicking. On the other side was a 
shimmering floor of the noxious slime, across which was a console with a 
blue key card. “Doesn’t look too promising,” Arlene said. 

I was never optimistic where toxic goo was concerned; but my head was 
still flying from the adrenaline, a perfect recipe to make a volunteer. 

“Tl go,” I said. “I could use the exercise. Jogging is just what my heart 
needs right now.” 

“You need to rest, Fly!” 

That was thoughtful of her. I appreciated her sentiments as I evaded her 
grasp and stepped into the gunk, my boots making shunk-shoosh sounds, 
slowing me down and eating bit by bit through the thick soles. Then I 
stepped on something hard and felt it shift under me. Heavy machine 
sounds came up through the slime, followed by something more substantial. 
A section of floor rose through the toxin. 

Staggering was not a good idea. I didn’t want to fall down in this. I 
regained my footing as I saw a wire-mesh platform rising to match a set of 
blue-paneled lights directly overhead. I was just about to take steps when 


Arlene brushed past, turned, and stepped to the right to follow the path that 
was under those lights. 

As she ran out of the pathway an odd thing happened. More wire mesh 
rose to meet her footsteps, corresponding to the lights above, winking like 
the stars I hoped I would live long enough to see again. I followed her. A 
major improvement over the normal way of crossing the slimelands—did 
any other spills have such shortcuts installed, I wondered? 

When we reached the “island” on the other side of the green ocean, 
Arlene said, “You may have something with that rats-in-the-maze idea.” 

“No human would design this, except maybe a game show host.” 

“Game is right. I wonder if the entire moon has been reworked?’ She 
reached over and grabbed the blue key card. 

We found a door with pretty, blue trim; the key card popped it open. 
Inside, I whooped with pleasure to see my old buddy, the rocket launcher, 
with lots of little battery rockets as well as another AB-10 machine pistol. 

The body of an imp lay in a corner. “Think that one died of natural 
causes?” Arlene asked. 

“Unnatural more likely.” 

“Say,” she said, “if imps are smart enough to talk, why don’t they use 
weapons?” 

It was a good question . . . one of many that had started to gnaw at me. 
“Maybe because it wouldn’t be fair,’ I said. 

“Excuse me?” Arlene’s eyebrows shot skyward. “I must have misheard; 
it sounded like you said they don’t use weapons because it wouldn’t be 
fair.” 

“Let me rephrase . . . it would be a fair test of our defensive ability. The 
mastermind—whoever, whatever—wouldn’t learn much except what we 
look like when we die . . . and God knows, it already knows that well 
enough.” 

After a moment of silent thought, Arlene whispered, “I don’t like it, Fly; 
it makes me feel like we’re being watched.” 

“You think I’m paranoid?” 

“T didn’t say I didn’t agree; I don’t like the implications, that the whole 
invasion of the Martian moons is just practice, a war game, just the prelude 
tO" 

“To what?” 


‘“‘We’d damn well better find out, Flynn Taggart.” 

Arlene took the AB-10. I took the sweet darling that could kill minotaurs 
and open doors. 

We didn’t run into any trouble on our way to the other lift on this level; it 
was clearly marked on the video map. Maybe that was because there was so 
much trouble in the refinery. There must be a Law of Conservation of 
Tsouris. But the buttons for all levels below the next were inoperative. It 
was a local shuttle only. Arlene made triumphant noises, but I reminded her 
that we never did have a bet on. 

Only way out is down, I repeated, and pressed the button. Whatever 
Arlene said, I still thought my primary duty was to get her the hell out of 
hell; but at the moment, her path and my path were the same: we both 
needed to burn deeper into the nightmare. 

“T don’t like the look of this place,’ said Arlene as we stepped from the 
lift into a vine-covered hallway. 

‘“What’s not to like? Rows of skulls, walls covered with squirming, 
writhing, fleshy ivy .. . should be like high school by now.” 

We gave the tendrils a wide berth; they looked like they might loop 
around our throats and strangle the life from us. 

“Fly,” Arlene whispered, “I see another lift right through there.’ She 
pointed to the left, at a gap in the ivy on that side where I suddenly realized 
there was no wall—only the squirming expanse of “plant” life. 

“Uh-oh,” I said. There was more on the other side than a room with a lift 
in it. There were our old friends, the demons . . . imps, too. 

We dropped back from the window while the imps began to hiss and 
heave flaming spitwads. Then my pal Arlene froze my marrow with a 
professionally calm voice in my ear: “Fly, I think we’re going to need the 
rocket launcher, too.” 

I was already getting ready to rock ’n’ roll when I turned to see a pair of 
giant, floating pumpkins trapped in a cage ahead of us. I could have sworn 
that spot was empty when we first came in here! Maybe the cage had been 
lowered just now. 

If it had been demons, we could have ignored them; but the bars were 
spaced far enough apart that the pumpkins had all the space they needed to 
fire their deadly ball-lightning. 


There was no telling why these heads were locked up; but it meant no 
more security for us than caged machine gunners. 

The air crackled above us; electrical discharge ran thousands of prickling 
little fingers down my head and back, and our hair stood at attention. Arlene 
looked like a Goosh Ball. Focusing my concentration on the single task of 
standing up and firing, I heard her shout, “I'll take our nine!” referring to 
the maddened imps and demons to our left, at the “nine o’clock” position, 
ripping through the ivy. 

We ducked as the fireballs seared the same area where the balls of 
lightning had played electric hairdresser. I wished the imps and pumpkins 
were only closer together, so that the fireballs and lightning balls might 
cross paths and wipe out both monster lines. 

I nearly got my wish. Arlene opened up with the AB-10; when the imps 
returned fire, they hit their demon buddies . . . the rest was history. While 
demons swallowed imps, who did their best to give a horrible case of 
heartburn, I squeezed the firing ring, turning the pumpkin cage into an oven 
to bake pumpkin pie. 

“Are you all right?” I asked. I could tell from the way she was shaking 
her head that she hadn’t been this close to the rocket explosions before. 

‘As soon as the phone stops ringing between my ears,” she answered. 

“Pack a wallop, don’t they?” 

I was still worrying about the giant blocks of flesh as we skirted the cage 
and entered an empty, gray room. “They used to use a lot of chambers 
around here to crush ore and refine the liquid,’ Arlene explained. “Be 
careful . . . lots of dangerous equipment.” Indeed, I could hear some heavy 
machinery really earning its keep right nearby. But what? 

No platforms or lifts, no rising staircases; then Arlene won the prize by 
looking straight overhead. 

“Holy ore-crusher, Batman!” she yelped. 

The damned ceiling was descending on us. Not too fast, but fast enough. 
“Didn’t I see this in a trideo?” I asked, edging back the way we’d come. 

“Tt’s just too Edgar Allan poetic,” said Arlene. 

We backed out before turning into grease spots. “Now what?” 

“Hate to say it, Fly .. . but there ain’t no other way to book. There must 
be a door or something in there—if we can find it and pop it before they 
have to scrape us up with a spatula.” 


The ceiling hit bottom, then rose again at the same stately pace. “We 
could hunt for another route past this garlic press,” she said hesitantly. “But 
I’m pretty sure this is the only direct route around to Sector Nine, where we 
were looking through the ivy window at the other lift. At least, that’s how I 
remember it from when I was posted here. 

“Look, Fly, let me go in and hunt; I know what this place is like better 
than you.” 

I hated the thought—Arlene under the crushing ceiling while I waited 
outside, “guarding”! But. . . she had a point. 

Flashlight in one hand, Arlene ran to the opposite end of the room while 
the ceiling was still rising. She rubbed her palm gently across the smooth 
surface. 

“How are you doing?” my voice was strong enough to call out. 

“T can’t find any switches!” she called. Worried, I started pacing in front 
of the Poe chamber, a restless sentry. Arlene found nothing . . . but would 
you believe it? J triggered a motion sensor, causing a door to slide open near 
her. It was pure, dumb luck. 

“Come on,” she shouted. The ceiling had reached the top and was 
descending again. I ducked my head like a halfback center-punching 
through the line and bolted across the room through the door—which had 
already begun to close as the ceiling fell. 

The door led to the room I’d seen from above, with huge, fleshy cubes 
rising and falling, an alien mockery of the ore-crushers. 

But the blocks weren’t just flesh; they were alive. Twenty-five pink, 
fleshy pumping platforms completely covering a room seemed more 
pointless than disgusting. They made high, whining sounds like newborn 
infants. 

‘What the hell are they?” I asked. 

“Wonder if they can move out of those holes in the floor?” 

“Christ,” I added, “what do they do?” 

Arlene edged closer to one block. She squatted and rose with it, 
following it down and up. “This isn’t just random flesh, Fly; this is muscle 
tissue. Human muscle tissue.” 

I approached another block. “This is a heart or liver or something.” I 
tracked along the edge of blocks. The last of the five blocks comprised 


convoluted ridges and furrows, folds in a grayish, spongy medium. “Unless 
my grandma’s been lying all these years,” I said, “them there’s brains, A.S.” 

“Yecch.” We backed away. “All right . . . muscles, brains, some kind of 
organ meat—this suggest a pattern to you, Fly?” 

“Several.” None of them pleasant. 

“Are they farming meat, human flesh?” 

“That’s the best-case scenario, Arlene.” 

She looked at me with eyes widening. “And the worst-case?” 

I smiled grimly. “They’re farming humans. They’re getting the hang of 
growing human cells because they’re trying to genetically engineer zombie- 
soldiers, better than the pathetic ones they have now.” 

We watched the blocks rise and fall a couple more minutes. Then Arlene 
upspake. “Corporal?” 

“Yes, PFC?” 

“Permission to hose their research?” 

“Permission enthusiastically granted. You have something in mind, 
Arlene?” 

She did. There was a row of torches along the wall we’d entered by. We 
blew them out, then upended them, spilling the oil as we hopped from block 
to squishy block. At the far end, I let Arlene light the ceremonial cigarette 
lighter. It was her idea, after all. 

We left the flesh blocks joyously in flame. I supposed the bone block 
would survive. Well, let the bastards animate skeletons, then! 

We bolted down a corridor and turned the corner; there I halted in 
astonishment. Arlene plowed into me, then she too stared. 

Fifteen demons had arranged themselves in a semicircle, backs to us, and 
they were grunting in unison, giving the impression of speech. Over to the 
right I noticed a barrel of the ooze. 

“Have I ever told you about my barrel trick?’ I whispered. 

“Back up around the corner.” I followed her, then peered around, lined 
up my shot very carefully, and gently squeezed the trigger. 

The world exploded. The heat blast pressed on my right eye and right 
hand as I pulled back. The explosion even drowned out the screams of the 
demons. 

When the debris settled and the last piece of pink and red demon flesh 
flopped to the smooth floor, Arlene nodded. “Impressive,” she pronounced. 


Then we found out what the demons had been doing crowded into that 
semicircle. They had been worshiping. 

Out of the smoke and flame strode a hell-prince . . . and it was as mad as 
its name. It burst through the wreckage, throwing pieces of demon and 
chunks of masonry in all directions, a state-of-the-art minotaur with one 
hell of a ’tude. 

The hell-prince roared defiance and began firing deadly bolts at us from 
its wrist launchers. 


22 


Run!” I shouted as I started loading the rocket launcher. She 
wasn’t listening. Her AB-10 was rattling off hundreds of shots that 
harmlessly bounced off the hellion. Our only chance was the rocket 
launcher. 

I fired off the first two rockets as I was dancing backward; the force 
knocked me into Arlene and sent us both sprawling. The AB-10 skidded 
across the floor, and Arlene went after it on hands and knees. An energy 
bolt flashed between us, searing my eyeballs for a moment. I didn’t care if I 
could see, so long as I could feel the smooth, metal surfaces of the little D- 
cell rockets and finish reloading. Just as I finished loading, my vision 
cleared; the eight-foot hell-prince bore down upon us, surrounded by smoke 
and stinking of brimstone. 

I’d promised myself never, ever to fire off rockets this close to the target! 
But a good look at that green gorgon face with the ram’s horns was all I 
needed to reassess my position. I squeezed. 

The third and fourth direct hits slowed the behemoth to a confused 
crawl; but still it stood. I could see again—but now I couldn’t hear. 

Loading, fingers numb, I didn’t bother getting back to my feet; I fired 
from where I lay. I slid past Arlene, who had picked up her machine pistol 
and was aiming it. 

She shielded her eyes and hugged the ground as rockets five and six 
pounded the same tough chest that had withstood the previous four. 

I closed my eyes while sliding; the force of the sound took me like a 
physical wave, carrying me down the hall. The weight of Mars pressed on 
my eardrums as I rose groggily to my feet to reload the launcher. The Prince 
of Hell stood stock-still, eyeing me with a doleful expression. 

I aimed and prepared to fire; but the monster made a loud, wheezing 
sound—a sigh?—and tumbled over, stiff as a statue, to impact directly on 


its face. 

“What in God’s name was that?” Arlene gasped, still shaking. 

“No naming game for this baby,’ I said. “Already has a name. You’re 
looking at the same model of Hell Prince you dodged when you slipped 
through the crack on Phobos, before the Gate. This is what was tramping 
down the corridor while you scrawled a skull and C-bones on the wall.” 

She shook her head, clearing alien cobwebs and appearing truly weary 
for the first time. “Boy, if the light had been better, you’d have been on your 
own, Fly, ’cause I sure as hell wouldn’t have wasted two seconds making a 
mark with that mother staring me in the face.” 

“Oh yes you would have.” 

“Egomaniac.” 

We needed all the cheering we could give each other. Picking through 
the carcasses, it seemed unfair that our only reward would be more ooze 
exactly where we needed to go. 

“Damn,” said Arlene, “the whole place looks flooded.” 

“You came up with the jogging theory,’ I reminded her. “Let’s find out 
how good it is.” 

I shouldn’t have said anything, for then she insisted on going first, 
running through the middle of the toxin. I followed close behind, feeling the 
pain right through my soles. We didn’t quite manage to jog, but we did keep 
up a brisk walk. 

The toxin slowed us down with a sucking, gripping quality; each second 
made me feel like it had been too long since my last checkup. I kept 
wishing for another of those crazy blue spheres to show up: I was beginning 
to wonder if I’d imagined the first. 

All bad things come to an end. We finally made it around the facility to 
the other elevator in Sector 9, not ten feet from where we’d started, if only 
we'd been able to shove through the flesh-ivy. I was beginning to hate the 
ooze more than I did the monsters . . . except when it was in barrels. 

The lift was the antique kind with a lever to start and stop, rather than 
buttons. We had a hell of a time trying to get it to stop at the next level 
down. 

The level started with a teleporter; not a good sign, far as I was 
concerned. “My turn to go first,” I said; Arlene didn’t argue. 


By the time she arrived, thirty seconds later, I was back at work. I'd 
killed three imps and five former soldiers/workers, a more dim-witted than 
usual zombie collection. 

“My turn to rescue you,” she said; but this was duck soup after the hell- 
prince. Heck, most of the zombies weren’t even armed! 

“We’re getting good at this,” I said. 

“Don’t get cocky,” she warned. I let it pass without remark. 

A platform lowered as we approached, as if inviting us into the parlor; 
still feeling cocky despite Arlene’s warning, I stepped aboard. Arlene 
followed, of course. 

At the top, I took a turn and came face to face with another hell-prince, 
holding a blue key card in its claws! 

“Get it—get it!” Arlene shouted; I didn’t know whether she meant the 
card or the monster . . . but in either case, I had only four rockets left, not 
enough! 

I jerked up the launcher, then paused, staring. Something was weird. 
Then I realized: we were nose-to-snout, and the thing hadn’t screamed yet. 

Or moved. I edged closer . . . It was frozen solid, like it had seen a 
gorgon from Greek mythology. Turned to stone. 

Heart pounding like a pile driver, I stepped close and gently plucked the 
blue key card from its claw. Then I rejoined Arlene on the floor, still 
shaking. 

Toxic waste literally surrounded us, the dry space where we stood like an 
island. The light was good enough to see other raised machinery platforms 
making islands in this sea. 

Arlene found a pole of thin metal. She tapped around for shallow parts 
and traced a crossable path to the first “island”; then she repeated the 
process until we made it through the toxic goop and into blue-glowing 
corridor. 

At least the color of the corridor made me glad to have the blue key card. 
On cue, we ran into a blue-trimmed door at the end of the corridor. We 
crossed into a narrow corridor with red-glowing walls, floor, and ceiling, so 
bright that it hurt our eyes. We heard a familiar thud-thud at the end of the 
hall; it sounded like more flesh blocks. 

Variety is the spice of life, even on Deimos. The sounds came from a 
piece of stamping machinery that didn’t seem to be the least bit organic. I 


was grateful for that. 

“Oh, great,’ said Arlene, “some jerk has tossed another key card onto the 
base.” The implication was that we couldn’t walk away from something so 
valuable as another computer key card. 

A giant, metal piston repeatedly smashed down to within a few 
centimeters of the base, stamping anything on the base into powder. 
“Arlene, why would anyone put the card out for us, except as bait? We don’t 
need it.” 

‘“‘We used the blue card to get this far,’ she insisted. ““What’s behind the 
mystery yellow door?” 

“But Arlene .. 2’ She was through listening. The only way to get the 
yellow key card was to slide across the base, grab it, and roll off the other 
side before the stamping part came down to turn the contestant into pate. 

She backed away, measuring the piston’s rise and fall with her eyes. I 
was about to stop her and tell her about the patented Fly technique for 
opening doors; then I remembered my meager supply of rockets. 

“At least let me do that,” I said. 

“You? Corporal Two-left-feet on the drill field?” 

I opened my mouth to angrily protest; then I realized she was right— 
understating it, if anything. I never could get the timing right on anything 
more complicated than dress-right-dress or point-and-shoot. 

My heart in my mouth, I watched Arlene count, timing the piston. Then 
quickly, before she could think better of it or I could object again, she 
jumped just as it hit the low point and started to rise again. 

Arlene sprinted across the room and threw herself into a face-first 
baseball slide, scooping the key card in her arms. She slid to a halt . . . but 
she was still on the base! 

For an instant she froze. I couldn’t possibly reach her in time—and a 
horrible image flashed through my mind. 

If Arlene died, in the next cycle, I knew I would jump on the machine 
and die alongside her. 

Thank God I didn’t have to make that decision; at the last second she 
made a panic roll off the platform. 

Arlene left the key card on the stamper, near the edge; but it was a 
simple matter, when the piston rose, to scoop it off from where she stood. 


She pocketed it .. . and good thing; past the stamping machine was a 
thick airlock door, tough as a bank vault, surrounded by yellow lights. I 
doubt a rocket would even have scratched the chrome. Maybe a SAM. 

The yellow key card let us into a central, circular corridor surrounding a 
giant, cylindrical room. We took a lift down into the room; once inside, the 
lift moved up again. 

“Uh, Fly, I don’t see any switch to bring it back down.’ Damned if she 
wasn’t right. 

From inside, the lift door looked like a spine with ribs coming out of it. 
Once again, no human would ever have made anything like this. The aliens 
were definitely reworking Deimos, and had been for some time. 

“T don’t like their interior decorator,’ she said, as if reading my mind. 
She tilted her head in the direction of the latest attraction. A row of what 
looked like red spittoons stretched out of sight, and on each one there was a 
skull bathed in red light. 

“Tf these were human minds, I’d say they were psychotic,” I commented. 

“You know something, Fly? Every monster we’ve seen has a head too 
large or strangely shaped to be mistaken for a human head.” 

“Yes: 

“Then how do you account for the skulls? Whether they’re designs on 
walls or ceilings or whole skulls like these, they’re all human.” 

“And they couldn’t have been taken from us, not all of them; with all the 
zombies and unbeheaded corpses, who’d be left?” 

She touched one. “This isn’t real,” she said. ‘““More like metal than bone.” 

I turned it over, looking at it from different angles. “Ill bet it’s meant to 
scare us, same as the freakin’ swastika. Well, we’re past being bothered by 
Halloween.” 

I instantly regretted my choice of words. No sooner would I toss a 
challenge into the air than it would be answered. Was someone watching 
our every move? 

This time it was a horde of Imps, zombies, and a couple of pumpkins 
coming around the curve of the room, screaming doom in our ears. 
Fortunately, they were only coming at us from the one direction. We would 
have had no chance if attacked from both directions. 

Arlene dropped flat, and I let fly with my last rockets. I ignored the imps, 
concentrating on the two pumpkins, the greater threat. 


Somebody got careless on the other side, and soon all the monsters were 
mixing it up among themselves. 

We drew back around the curve and waited for silence; then we slid back 
and smoked the survivors with shotgun and AB-10. I still had one last 
rocket. 

In the course of the fight, somebody—us or them—accidentally activated 
a switch in the floor that caused part of a staircase to rise. When the last 
pumpkin smashed into orange and blue slime against the ruined head of the 
last assassinated imp, we started up the steps. Arlene activated the next 
switch. 

Another set of steps rose, and we took them to the third switch and set of 
stairs. At the top we found a teleporter. 

We stepped aboard one at a time, me first, teleporting to a long corridor 
with barred windows looking outside. Arlene bent over for a closer view 
and pulled back with a gasp. 

“Let me guess,” I said. “You didn’t see the stars or Mars.” 

Swallowing hard, she motioned for me to look for myself. She wasn’t in 
the mood for humor. Blood had drained from her face, a reaction I’d never 
before seen in Arlene. I put my face against the window. 

As a child, I'd seen a painting in a museum that gave me my first 
nightmare. I hadn’t thought of it in years; but now it came back to me. 

Beyond the window was a river of human faces, hundreds of them, each 
an island in an ocean of flesh. Each face had a horrified expression stamped 
on it, each a damned soul. 

The spectacle achieved its purpose. We were both distracted. Otherwise 
we wouldn’t have been so careless as to allow a stomping, single-minded 
demon to get close enough to clamp its jaws on Arlene’s back and shoulder. 

Her cries were echoed by each face in the river of damned souls, each 
screaming Arlene’s pain and torment. 


23 


Arlene!” I shouted. I grabbed the monster with my hands and 
literally pulled it off her before it could position itself to take a second and 
certainly lethal bite. 

It stumbled clumsily. I grabbed the AB-10 and pumped two dozen 
rounds into its open, blood-caked maw. It didn’t get up. 

I was almost afraid to touch her. Blood pumped out of the horrible, fatal 
wound. 

Arlene was dying. 

Her face was sallow, eyes vacant and staring. One pupil was dilated, the 
other contracted to a pinpoint. There was nothing I could do, not even with 
a full medical lab. 

But damn her, she was not going to die here and join that river of faces. 

As gently as I could, I lifted Arlene’s bleeding body in my arms and 
carried her out of that circle of hell. Her rasping breath was a call to arms, a 
signal that life and hope still remained in the young gal. 

I set her down at the end of the corridor; the lift door was blocked by a 
river of what appeared to be lava. Hoping the red stuff was at least no worse 
than the green stuff, I dashed across into an alcove where a single switch 
mocked me. 

I flipped it, causing a path to rise up through the “lava.” So far, so good. I 
ran back, grabbed Arlene, and walked across the path as quickly as 
possible. 

At the last step before reaching the lift, I heard a grinding noise from 
behind. I paused and looked back: a new path rose slowly, leading to an 
alcove hidden from view except from where I now stood. 

The cubbyhole contained another one of the blue-face spheres that I 
thought I’d never see again, the one item that I had hesitated to tell Arlene 
about because it seemed so incredible. 


The sight was like another of the adrenaline bursts. Quickly, before the 
path could lower again, I powered her across, not bothering to stop and pick 
up pieces of equipment that fell from us, some landing on the path, some 
lost in the lava. I had a great terror that the sphere would fly away just 
before I got there, like a carnival balloon just out of reach. 

I reached it, hesitated for a moment—then literally threw Arlene onto the 
sphere to make sure I wouldn’t be the one to touch it first. 

With a nearly audible silent pop, the blue liquid was all over her; and the 
red liquid on her body, the blood, evaporated into the blue. Arlene sat up 
and coughed, looking like someone coming out of a deep sleep. 

“How do you feel?” 

“My shoulder hurts like a son of a bitch. What the hell happened?” 

“Pinkie decided to have you for a midnight snack. I put him on a diet. 
You sure you’re all right?” 

Standing up, she shook her arm, staring in wonder at the shredded sleeve 
and tooth marks. ““What in God’s name did you do to me?” 

I figured the time had finally come to tell her about the magical blue 
spheres. She had no trouble believing me. 

Only my pistol and some shotgun shells had been lost to the lava. 
Weapons in hand, we slid into the elevator and pressed the only floor 
button, labeled Command Center. 

The lift had barely begun to grind slowly downward when suddenly 
Arlene reached past me and pushed the red “kill” button. The elevator 
stopped, falling silent. 

“Why did you kill the power?” 

She stared at me before answering. For a moment I had a terrible fear 
that something had gone wrong with the blue sphere and she was going to 
turn into a zombie in front of me. Instead she asked, “Fly, are you starving, 
or is it just me?” I shook my head. She continued: “Maybe it’s that blue 
thing, but I’m so famished I could swallow one of those pink demons.” 

“How about floating pumpkin pie for dessert?” 

“And I’m suddenly exhausted. Fly, I need some sleep.” I had completely 
lost track of the supplies. Arlene hadn’t. “Don’t you ever listen to training 
videos? Never wander into battle without MREs.” She demonstrated the 
truth of her maxim. Suddenly, I realized I was hungrier than I thought. A 


Meal Ready to Eat sounded like the finest, gourmet cuisine in the solar 
system. 

“A stopped elevator as a secure base. I never would’ve thought of it.” 

“Next best thing to a Holiday Inn,’ she added, raising an eyebrow. 
Arlene showed a domestic side that surprised me. While we talked, she took 
the packages of freeze-dried food and mixed them in the water of her 
canteen. “Sorry it'll be cold,’ she said as I watched her shake the contents 
with the skill of a bartender preparing the perfect martini. 

“That’s all right, beautiful. I like cold—” I picked up the package, 
glanced at the title. “—-cold beef stew.” 

I also liked the fact that Arlene was alive. As we chowed down, I felt the 
strongest emotions since finding her on Deimos. 

Maybe she sensed the inappropriate feelings coming off me in waves. 
She lowered her head and blinked rapidly, as if stopping herself from crying 
by main force. 

‘“What’s wrong?” I asked. 

“Don’t want to tell you.” 

“Why not?” 

She hesitated. “Willy,” she said. “PFC Dodd.” 

“Oh.” I squirmed uncomfortably. 

“T’ve been forcing myself not to think about him. He’s dead, isn’t he? 
Or . . . worse.” 

“You don’t know that! I thought you were dead or reworked, but I found 
you alive.” 

“Find anybody else?” 

I didn’t say anything. 

“Fly, ’ve accepted the fact. That he’s dead, I mean. I don’t think I could 
face—the other possibility.’ She looked up, her eyes moist but not tearing. 
“Promise me something.” 

“Anything possible.” 

“If we find him and he is, you know .... and if I can’t do it. . . will you? 
Promise? And don’t mention him again.” 

I nodded, not trusting myself to speak. Funny lump in my throat. Yeah, 
babe; I'll be happy to blow away my rival for your hand if he should 
happen to turn up a zombie. No problemo! 


She changed the subject, wrenching my mind back on the primary issue. 
“Fly, I think it’s pretty likely that the aliens we’re fighting aren’t the same 
ones who built the Gates.” 

“I was wondering about that myself,’ I said. “All this weird stuff, skulls 
and satanic symbols—there was nothing about the Gates themselves that 
hinted at this. The Gates don’t look like a Vincent Price movie.” 

“There’s nothing eldritch about the Gates,” she said. I was starting to like 
that word. “So let’s assume these aliens found the Gates and discovered a 
way to turn them on from the other end. But why do they look so much like 
human-style demons?” 

“Genetic engineering?” I suggested. “They could be deliberately 
designed to look like our conception of hell, particularly the hell-princes. 
They’re the dead giveaways.” 

“Can’t you find some other word than dead?” she begged, a fleck of red 
tomato paste on her lips. 

“The hell-princes are just too much like medieval drawings of the devil 
to be natural.” 

“Unless they really are hell-princes,’ Arlene said. 

I shook my head, unwilling to consider that possibility. So we sat in 
silence for a moment, finishing our food and drink. Much more thinking 
along these lines and I’d be ready to take communion again. 

“T was never really afraid of monsters as a child,’ Arlene finally said. 
“Grown-ups were scary enough by themselves.” 

“Why invade at all? What is this for?” 

“Good question,’ she said. “Here’s another: If they can genetically 
engineer imps and demons, why do they need human zombie-slaves? And 
why grow human flesh?” 

“Maybe they want super-zombies, more powerful than these dead 
excuses for lemmings, but still able to pass among us undetected.” 

Arlene yawned, struggling to show enthusiasm. “But that may be their 
weakness, Fly. The zombies don’t amount to much. You and I aren’t scared 
by skulls and evil symbols. What if there is a finite number of the actual 
monsters and they can’t easily recreate them? What if the monsters too are 
‘reworked’ from other creatures, creatures the mastermind has to breed and 
raise? That would mean every horrible creature we kill is one fewer to 


invade Earth if they can’t be replaced. Until the new, improved pod-people 
come on-line.” 

I liked it. “Arlene, if you’re right, all we have to do is kill everything . . . 
and we end the invasion.” 

We didn’t have anything for dessert, so we used imagination to sweeten 
the conversation. “I’ve been thinking about the idea they’re using Deimos as 
a spaceship,” I said. “How can you move something as large as a whole 
moon?” 

“IT was thinking some sort of hyperspace tunnel. Yeah, I know; I’ve been 
reading too much sci-fi, Fly.” 

I didn’t say it. At least it was something, a hypothesis. “Maybe there’s 
some way to break through the tunnel walls?” I asked. 

“Maybe. But it could also kill us. We don’t know if ‘outside the walls’ 
has the same physical laws; and even if it does, if there’s even any air.’ 

“It could also disrupt what’s happening, maybe destroy Deimos and 
everything on it.” 

“Including us? But that would throw a monkey wrench in their invasion 
plans,” she said with a smile that turned into a yawn. She wasn’t bored. Her 
eyelids were heavy from exhaustion. 

“If these creatures run the moon—the ship,’ I said, “then what horrors 
guard the tunnel wall?” 

“Those faces couldn’t be real, could they? I hated those faces . . .” Her 
head nodded forward and she snored. It wasn’t a very loud snore. 

The elevator was as secure a place as we were likely to find. I sat watch 
and let her sleep. There was an eerie silence despite the faint vibration. 
After four hours I woke her up. 

“Your turn,” she insisted, rubbing pieces of sleep from her eyes. 

“Don’t let me sleep more than three hours.” 

“Fly, sleep! I command you to sleep,” she said, making hypnotic passes. 
I slept . . . not because of the mystic passes, but because of a mud slogger’s 
ability to sleep anywhere. 

I could have done without the dreams. 

The river of faces touched something deep in both of us, the place where 
you store up all your fears and regrets. Going to sleep meant sinking right 
into that place. 


I was tangled in long, sticky fibers like a giant spiderweb, but at the 
center of the web was a face made of a hundred different faces. I didn’t 
want to look at it; but the face came closer, slowly rotating like a planet, 
showing different faces spread across its surface, smiles melting into 
frowns, rows of eyes like so many beads of glass, noses creating an uneven 
mountain range stretching to the horizon. 

Then the sphere of blue faces was pressed right against mine, and it had 
stopped turning. In the center was the face of my long dead grandfather as I 
had seen him in the open casket. His toothless mouth was working, lips 
twisting, but no sounds came out. 

I knew what he was saying, though: “Dinna let them rework me, Fianna 
Flynn, me lad. . . dinna never let them rework us all, b’Gad.” 

The sticky fibers became tendrils sliding up my nose and into my mouth, 
choking me. The truth is out there .. . 

I woke up in a cold sweat. Arlene was shaking me hard. “Fly, are you 
okay?” 

“Sleep is overrated,’ I gasped. I was just as tired as when I’d put my 
head down. Standing, I felt dizzy. Probably running a fever, but I didn’t 
want to mention it. There was nothing to be done anyway. I pushed the 
button back in to reactivate the power; then I pushed the floor button, and 
the elevator continued its trip to the Command Center. 

It was a good thing we’d eaten and tried to get some rest. The moment 
the doors opened, we were in another damned firelight with zombies, imps, 
pumpkins, and a specter. 

The ambush trapped us in the lift. We used the lift doors for cover. 

By the time we worked our way out, we’d cleaned a huge room with 
stairways at either end, leading up to a split-level. There were six pillars; 
each had its designated nasty hiding behind it. 

Pushing through a door at the top of the split-level, we found a gigantic 
indoor garden or arboretum. The air was thick with pollen from a jungle of 
fleshy plants overgrowing where some breed of computers used to be. 

Arlene sneezed repeatedly. I lucked out. I was so exhausted that maybe I 
wasn’t breathing as deeply. “You can say one thing for the greenhouse,” I 
observed. “Plants are plants here, and not combined with machines.” 

Blowing her nose—allergies—Arlene added: “And men are men, and so 
are the women.” All that was missing was a handsome horse and blazing 


six-guns. 

The absence of monsters was reason enough to explore. We could 
breathe later. The primary motif seemed to be a blackish, oily wood that 
sure as hell never originated on the old home planet. Periodically, the wood 
bubbled and popped, like ulcerated sores in whatever monstrous trees had 
produced it. I imagined a three-headed Paul Bunyan with ax-handle hands 
cutting the planks. 

The ground squished underfoot as we walked; I looked closely and saw 
incredibly long, wafer-thin insects scooting out from under our feet. We 
finally reached the end of the arboretum and the vegetation ran out against 
puke-green marble, just as we’d seen back in the warehouse. 

“Will you look at that?” said Arlene, pointing at red-orange curtains of 
fire crackling beyond the high walls, at a sufficient distance that we weren’t 
roasting. 

“Now that’s bad taste,” I said. “Next they’ll have Lieutenant Weems in a 
red devil suit pop out of a cake.” 

“Complete with pointy tail?” she asked wryly. 

“You have a twisted mind, PFC Sanders.” 

The better to explore with, I added mentally. I hoped this situation wasn’t 
like those science fiction stories where the terrifying menaces are taken 
telepathically from the greatest fears of the human beings involved. My 
worst fears couldn’t be this corny! 

Arlene found a switch that opened a hidden room; we went with the 
flow. Entering the chamber, we marveled at how different it was from what 
we’d seen before. The entire room was constructed of that black, oily, 
ulcerating wood. There was one object in the room, placed at dead center: a 
bas relief of a demonic monster more horrible, or more ridiculous, than any 
we'd fought. Every physical attribute of the thing was exaggerated so that it 
almost seemed to be a cartoon. The largest protuberance of all was its penis, 
sticking out at a 45-degree angle. 

“They’ve got to be kidding,” said Arlene. 

“T hate to bring it up, but that’s probably another switch,” I suggested. 

“T’ve handled worse,” she admitted. 


24 


As she flipped the switch, we heard familiar heavy, grinding 
sounds outside in the marble chamber. Being nearer the door, I took a look- 
see. I wasn’t the least bit surprised to see a set of stairs rising up in the 
marble room leading straight up to one of the walls of fire. Arlene joined 
me in pondering this new development. Neither of us seemed to be in a 
great hurry to run up those stairs. 

“Do you feel fireproof?” she asked me. 

“T left my asbestos pajamas back on Earth.” 

“Maybe there’s an opening we can’t see from down here.” 

“We can only dream,’ I sighed. I went first. She was close behind, 
though. As soon as it became too hot, I had every intention of stopping. I 
didn’t feel any heat at all. 

Arlene noticed as well. “This isn’t a bit like Campfire Girls,’ she said. 
“By now, all the marshmallows in my pocket should be screaming out: ‘Put 
me on a stick!’” 

“You have marshmallows?” 

“No.” 

“T don’t think it’s a real flame. Wait here, Arlene. If I catch on fire or die 
of heat stroke, you’ll know there was something wrong with my theory.” 
Another ten steps up the stairs convinced me that I was definitely on to 
something. Ten more steps and I was becoming certain. I still wasn’t hot as 
I walked right up to the curtain of seething flame and very slowly put my 
hand out. 

The hand went right through the fire, disappearing from view without 
causing Yours Truly the least discomfort. I didn’t even get a blister. 
“Arlene,” I called out, “the fire is an illusion. Come on up.” 

I walked right through, then turned around where the fire should be .. . 
and there was nothing there but the welcome sight of Arlene coming up the 


stairs. “Arlene, can you see me?” I asked. 

“No,” she answered, staring right at me. “You’ve disappeared behind the 
fire.” 

“For my next illusion,’ I announced with my best stage magician’s voice, 
and stepped back through where the curtain had to be, “I pull something 
cool out of my hat.” 

“Like a beer?” she asked, taking the last steps two at a time so we stood 
on the same level. 

“No beer, but I do have a surprise.” She was curious, and I bent from the 
waist, gesturing through the curtain. She preceded me to the big surprise. 

“Oh, no,” she said, “not another teleporter.” 

We were both pretty worn-down by this point, but a new teleporter meant 
we had to make a decision. What we needed was a map to show us the 
location of all the frying pans and fires. “So should we bother with this one 
or not?” 

She sighed. ““We’d better try it, Fly. We’ve got to find a way off this 
moon, and this is pretty carefully hidden away. Let’s give it a shot, hon.” 

‘“Who’s first this time?” I asked. 

She hooked her arm in mine. “Let’s do it together again.” 

Weapons out, we stepped aboard. With a flash of light, we zapped to a 
huge room shaped like the spokes of a wagon wheel. 

Six hell-princes surrounded us. 

Six monstrous mouths opened. 

Six monstrous throats emitted guttural screams. 

Twelve angry, red eyes burned at us in the dim light. 

The hell-princes were not the only ones screaming. Arlene and I 
screamed, too. This was a sight to make anyone how! at the moon. As the 
green fireballs began exploding all around us, we simply lost it—running 
around like chickens with their legs cut off, shooting wildly. There was 
nowhere to run, but we sure as hell tried! 

“Duck!” we shouted at each other at about the same time. The balls of 
energy made fireworks over our heads. Our gunfire was nothing more than a 
quiet popping in that chaos, mild raindrops, but we kept firing, me with my 
shotgun and Arlene with her AB-10. 

I found a door by pure, random chance. Praying for a miracle, I hollered 
for Arlene and yanked the door open . . . and now I was surrounded by a 


dozen floating pumpkins! Frying pans and fires—definitely frying pans and 
pumpkins. 

Arlene screamed something from the chamber with the hell-princes, but I 
couldn’t hear her over my own screaming. This situation was fast becoming 


unacceptable. 
There were too many pumpkins even to think about shooting; death, 
doom, and destruction from all directions! I ran as fast as I could . . . right 


back into the room with the hell-princes. 

I wasn’t thinking very clearly, but Arlene still had her head screwed on. 
Her hand snaked out and grabbed me. She’d stepped inside another of the 
spoke-chambers and now hauled me inside with her. I imagined wall-to- 
wall demons waiting for us, zombies stacked like cordwood to the ceiling, 
imp tartare . . . but inside, for the moment, was nothing but Arlene and 
Yours Truly. 

She held a finger against her lips; I braced myself for the Bad Guys to 
come after us and imagined the absolute worst. A tidal wave of sound 
crashed on us—roaring, screaming, crashing. But all that came through that 
doorway was sound. The pumpkins and the hell-princes collided in a torrent 
of blood and vengeance. 

There were so many monsters that they took a long time to die. At least 
fifteen minutes Arlene and I crouched in our little closet of safety as the 
pumpkins splattered themselves against the horned heads of the hell- 
princes. Blue balls of energy evaporated against lethal lightning bolts. 
Blood flowed thick on the floor. We stayed right where we were. 

Finally, there was beautiful silence. We heard each other’s breathing. 
“Who goes first?” Arlene whispered. 

“What do you mean?” 

“Who takes a peek?” 

I raised my hand as if I were back in grade school. Cautiously I poked 
my head outside the star-pointed hideaway. A single hell-prince remained 
on its feet. I pulled back inside our hideaway and reported. 

“Then why isn’t he at the doorway threatening to rip our lungs out?” 

I looked past her. The hell-prince loomed in the doorway, waiting to... 

It looked like yesterday’s lunch today. Arlene saw my face, followed my 
eyes and saw it. 


I grabbed for my rocket launcher, but it was gone from the webbing— 
dropped in panic in one of the two rooms, of course! 

Arlene pointed her AB-10. “That won’t work,’ I shouted. A peashooter 
against the most powerful monster we’d run into! Had she gone insane? 

She pulled the trigger three times, and thrice the hammer clicked on an 
empty chamber. 

She stared as the mauled, bloody beast staggered forward like 
Frankenstein’s monster, clutching at her. Winding up like the Mud Hens’ 
star pitcher, she heaved the gun into the minotaur’s ugly face. Good God. 
I’m watching an old episode of Superman! I thought. 

It blinked. The horned head shook slowly back and forth, left to right, as 
if trying to remember something. 

Then it fell, straight as a toppling redwood, to the cold marble—dead. 

“And I didn’t even know he was sick,” said Arlene. We both burst into 
hysterical laughter—stress released. 

The floor was slippery with slick, tacky pumpkin juice, and we almost 
slipped several times. Clambering across the body of another hell-prince, 
Arlene pushed into the pumpkins’ room and shouted, “You won’t believe 
this!” 

“What?” I was hunting for my good pal, Mr. Launcher. 

“Get your butt in here! Um, please get your butt in here, Corporal.” 
There it was! I snagged it and clambered after her. 

The light was flickering, but I could see well enough. Crucified on the 
walls were the mutilated bodies of four hell-princes, with spidery trails of 
dried blood extending from their hands—if those hams with claws on the 
end could be called hands. 

“Jesus, Mary, and Joseph! What the hell is going on here?” Blasphemy! 
chanted my memory-nuns . . . demons crucified in mockery of Our Lord. 

The hell-princes were killed a long time ago; the dried blood told us that 
much. We made a circuit of the chamber and found plastic spheres with 
cracks so that they could swing open or close as easily. All the spheres were 
empty .. . but they were just the size to hold pumpkins. 

“Pumpkin nests,” said Arlene. 

I stared awhile longer at the four crucified bodies of the minotaurs. “My 
God, it must have been the damned pumpkins themselves put the princes up 
there! They must hate them worse than they do us.” 


It was a religious revelation for both of us. “No wonder it’s so easy to pit 
them against each other,” said Arlene in awe. “They despise and loathe each 
other so much, they proudly display each other’s ripped carcasses.” She 
looked up at me, face lighting up. “Jesus, Fly, we have a chance to win!” 

I saw where she was headed. I had thought that the monster-aliens were 
simply so bad-tempered that when a zombie stumbled in the way of an imp 
fireball, or a demon took a bullet meant for one of us, they lost their 
concentration and turned on each other with mindless ferocity. 

But “mindless ferocity” didn’t explain the cold, deliberate crucifixion of 
hell-princes by pumpkins, did it? Such a contemplative act required a deep, 
abiding animosity or hatred, and the single-minded determination to torture. 

Something, the “mastermind,” held them together; but left to themselves, 
the natural inclination of each monster would be to hunt down all the other 
kinds and kill them. 

The thought certainly suggested our tactic: kill the damned mastermind, 
and let nature take her course! 

Now the only question was where in this hell that mastermind was. 

We continued searching the pumpkin room. We found it stuffed with 
ammo, everything from rockets to shells to rounds for Arlene’s depleted 
AB-10; the various firelights had run us dry. After loading up, we pushed 
past one of the crucified hell-prince bodies and checked out the rest of the 
wagon wheel. 

Not a creature was stirring, not even a zombie. 

“Shall we teleport?” asked Arlene. 

“After what happened the /ast time we teleported?” 

“We going to spend the rest of our lives on this karmic wheel?” 

“Apres vous, Bodhisattva.” 

We teleported together. Appearing on a platform in a metallic room, we 
saw a door with blue trim that sure as shootin’ required a blue key card. 
Arlene went over and put her ear to it. “I hear what might be a lift 
operating; I guess we go thataway.” 

“Key, key, who’s got the key?” I asked. “Another typical day on the job. 
Teleport. Get a key. Open a door. Find a teleport.” 

Arlene smiled. “I guess we’re in a rut.” 


25 


Nothing remarkable about this area, except one dark section that 
was just begging for a flashlight. I went up, cast a light, and saw twisty 
passages that suggested a maze. The light was curiously muted, dying out 
after only a few feet. 

“You want to poke in here?” I whispered; whispering seemed 
appropriate. 

“Um ...no. Maybe we don’t need to; and I don’t like the look of the 
place. It’s dark—not that I’m afraid of the dark!” 

“Really? I sure am, especially recently. All right, it’s pitch-black, it’s a 
maze, and the ceilings are low and claustrophobic. Pass.” I mean, why? Life 
is short, especially on Deimos. 

I was still staring into the blackness when gunshots yanked my attention 
back to Arlene. I raced down the hall and saw her pumping slugs into tiny, 
emaciated demons, so small I almost didn’t recognize them. “Look what I 
found!” she exclaimed, kicking the tiny bodies aside. Reaching behind their 
corpses, Arlene extracted a blue key card. 

Tiny demons? I wondered . . . were they mutants? Failed experiments? 
Or did demons shrink when they starved? Other possibilities were more 
disturbing: Were these child demons? Were demons born or hatched, or 
created whole somewhere? I shuddered; whatever they were, they gave me 
the creeps more than their gigantic counterparts. 

She sprang the door with the key card, and we went right through, 
smooth as you please . . . only to discover another door right behind it, this 
one requiring a yellow card! “Egah,” I bellowed, and by God I meant it! 

An hour later we had traded a bunch of ammunition for a shiny, new, 
yellow key card. Don’t ask. 

We shuffled back to the mystery door, and Arlene inserted the card. 

It slid. Revealing . . . Yet another door: red. 


“You know,” I said, “there’s only one section of this whole place we’ve 
avoided.” 

“The dark, mazy thing we passed? Fly, we don’t even know there’s a key 
card in there, or that if there is, it’s red.” 

“Well... [shot a door open with a rocket once.” 

“How many rockets we have?” 

“Now? Six.” 

“How many does it take to kill a hell-prince?” 

“Usually six.” 

Arlene sucked air through her teeth. “Maze,” she voted. 

I understood her concern; if we used one or two rockets to open the last 
door, then encountered a minotaur on the other side, we’d be out of luck. I 
shrugged; maze it was. 

As we entered the pitch-black corridor, our flashlights barely penetrated 
the darkness. “There must be some kind of neutralizing or damping field,” 
Arlene whispered behind me. 

This bit was too close to that Jules Verne movie, where the members of 
the expedition get separated in the dark. I wasn’t going to let that happen to 
us. 

“Fly—didn’t I see a pair of goggles of some sort back in the yellow-key 
room?” 

“Did you? What of it?” 

“Could they be light-amplification goggles?” 

That sounded like a good excuse to get out of the dark. Actually, 
anything sounded like a good excuse to get out of that dark maze; I had the 
creepy feeling that creatures were shadowing us . . . creatures that didn’t 
need light-amp goggles. 

We returned the way we had come, and sure enough, the goggles were 
there. Arlene was right: one pair. “Will these even work in the energy- 
sucking field?” I wondered. 

Arlene shrugged. How else could we find out? 

At the mouth of the maze we hesitated. Who was to wear them? We 
settled it scientifically: my vision was 20-40, barely good enough to avoid 
glasses; Arlene’s was 20-15, better than “perfect.” In other words, she got 
the goggles. 


Besides, she was the girl. I don’t know why that occurred to me then; she 
seemed to get the goggles an awful lot. 

She put them on and adjusted for ambient light, then led me back into 
the tunnel of darkness. I don’t even like haunted-house rides at amusement 
parks. “Oh, spit,’ she said. 

“Don’t give me any bad news.” 

“Battery’s low.” 

“T told you not to give me any bad news.” 

“The goggles keep fading in and out.” She’d stopped walking forward 
and I bumped up against her again. “Or maybe it’s because of the field; but 
they’re lower power than the flashlights, and they do work .. . sort of.” 

She started moving again, and dark as it was, I made believe I was her 
shadow, hand on her shoulder. “Tell me what you see.” 

“Everything is green and fuzzy. It’s like looking at the world through a 
Coke bottle.” 

About five minutes into the maze Arlene dived to the side, bowling me 
over. An exploding ball of energy lit up our surroundings for a fraction of a 
second; but all I saw was the back of Arlene’s head. 

“Hell-prince!” she shouted. “Fly, use the launcher!” 

“Can’t we run?” 

“No,” she said, strangely insistent, “we’ve got to fight it!” 

I unslung and waited, staring wide-eyed into the black. “Where? Where 
is it?” 

“Tll guide you,” Arlene said, voice lower, more in control. Holding her 
shoulder so she wouldn’t be between me and my monster, I tried to aim the 
rocket launcher with the other hand. I couldn’t do it! 

“Still—stand still, beside me,’ she urged. “Right. Now listen. . . 
Another lightning ball scorched the air, pounding the wall just above my 
head, and I dropped the damned weapon! She didn’t miss a beat. “It’s right 
at your feet, Fly. Bend down, pick it up. 

“Why don’t you take it? You can see!” 

“Fly, I don’t know how to shoot it—never checked out on it. Now 
shoulder it, damn you.” 

“Aim me.” I was becoming impatient, but I knew she was working as fast 
as she could. 


9 


“Left, to the left, more, more; elevate . . . shoot now!” I squeezed the 
firing ring. The flare of the rockets lit up a cone of vision around us but I 
still couldn’t see the attacker. “Where is he? Where?” 

“Never mind—you winged him, Fly! Glancing blow to the stomach, 
knocked him down.” 

“Aim me again.” 

The second shot scored a direct hit. Normally that wouldn’t stop a hell- 
prince. He’d only redouble his efforts. But this one must have gotten lazy in 
the maze, only encountering victims occasionally, and no resistance worth 
mentioning. Suddenly I realized we were facing a minotaur in something 
like its natural habitat. 


Aim me—fire!—aim me .. . I loaded my sixth and final round. 
“Where?” 
Arlene waited a long time. “Fly . . . you knocked it to its butt in a chair 


thing with your last shot; it’s still breathing, but it’s not getting up.” 

We waited; the situation remained static. “All nght, kid,’ I said. “I guess 
we're Officially clear.” 

“And now I can officially tell you why we had to fight. Look at this— 
whoops, I mean feel this: a key card, though I have no idea what color; they 
all look green to me. That slime had it in its claws.” 

“You mean it was there while I fired rockets at the hell-prince? I could 
have destroyed the key, too!” 

“Well, that’s why I kept it a secret. Now aren’t you glad you saved those 
rockets?” 

“T guess so,’ I said, not bothering to point out that if we hadn’t gone into 
the maze at all, just used one or two rockets on the door, we’d be out of here 
by now, and richer in rockets, to boot. 

We started trekking back, and with the unerring instinct such items have, 
the batteries chose that moment to burn out. 

Arlene tipped me off with, “Damn it to hell!” 

She pulled the goggles off and shoved them into her pocket. “God, Fly, I 
don’t want to die in the dark.” I thought she had a perfectly reasonable 
attitude. The idea of being caught and torn to shreds when you can’t even 
see to fight back didn’t appeal to me, either. 

I had a vague idea of the way we must return. I took her hand and led her 
as fast as possible in that direction. Even found time to pray again. The nuns 


always knew the power of a dark room to inspire piety. 

After all that, I really was in no mood for a damned imp waiting for us 
when we’d almost made it through the maze. It hissed, and we stopped 
cold... we could hear it—but where was it? Hands shaking, I spun left and 
right with my scattergun, afraid to shoot lest I give away our own position. 
Or worse, hit Arlene! 

“Jesus!” Arlene shouted, finding religion as a fireball careened over our 
heads. What a dolt—the imp, not Arlene; the fireball lit our surroundings, 
and in the glare I fixed Arlene and the imp. When the fireball faded, I shot 
where the imp was. Arlene didn’t kill time when she could kill a monster 
instead; she fired just as I did, and the imp was toast. 

We were back in the light in short order. We returned to the three-door 
stack. I performed the honors of opening the last door, popping through, 
finding the lift, pressing the down button . . . and asking Arlene if she didn’t 
enjoy the music of screams and explosions behind us as the monsters took 
care of each other. They were running out of humans. 

“This is a hell of an invasion,” she said. 

“You can say that again.” 

Deimos must have been listening and eager to confirm every prejudice 
we had. As the lift door slid open at the next level down, we found 
ourselves staring into the hugest, hairiest, foulest, and pinkest butt I'd ever 
seen. 

One of the demons, Arlene’s “pinkies,” was standing with its backside up 
against the lift door. It hadn’t even noticed that the door had opened. 
Cautiously, I raised a machine gun and Arlene raised a shotgun. We gritted 
our teeth against the noise and fired simultaneously. A Light Drop rectal 
suppository. 

But on the other side of Demon One was Demon Two—and it did not 
take kindly to our prescription. This one charged like a hausfrau on speed in 
a megastore. 

We hadn’t been able to see it originally because its buddy had blocked 
the view. Now it dived through the door after us. 

The big silly got itself stuck. We took our time blowing this one to 
oblivion at point-blank range. Oh, our bruised eardrums! 

As Arlene wiped demon gunk out of her eyes, she took a gander at her 
clothes and asked, “Does this come out or is it like gravy?” 


“Don’t ask me. I was never much of a house husband.” 

Although we felt good about our most recent bout of carnage, we 
couldn’t help but notice that we’d trapped ourselves between two demon 
bodies, each of which probably weighed over five hundred kilos; a half ton 
per baby. We’d have to climb out between them. 

“How are you at mountain climbing?” she asked. 

“How are you at spelunking?” I asked back. 

She owned I was right; we didn’t so much climb over the bodies as 
burrow our way through them. It took a bit of wriggling and writhing, and 
breath holding, but eventually even I made it. 

The next problem consisted of some imps. Mighty monster slayers such 
as Arlene and myself could no longer be bothered with something so trivial 
as a few imps. We mopped up the floor with them on our way 

“T think we’re getting a bit cocky,’ Arlene said. 

“We earn the right to wear the haircut of our choosing,” I shot back, and 
she laughed louder than ever before. 

We entered a warehouse through an open door and around a couple of 
corners; this one was stacked wall-to-wall with pinkies, none as large as our 
elevator pals. They charged; having nowhere else to go, I leapt up, grabbed 
the edge of a huge box and hauled myself onto the top, then stretched out 
my hand for Arlene. 

The way the demons screamed and growled and pounded on the box, 
you'd think they didn’t appreciate initiative and quick thinking. They were 
so upset they made the box shake violently. I was afraid we might be 
thrown off, but by God, we hung on. Then we aimed, squeezed, and 
eventually the box stopped shaking. We didn’t have any trouble getting 
down. 

Now we had a moment to enjoy the new decor. The motif here was 
gleaming chrome and intricate, blued enamel. The appearance was rather 
sci-fi, actually . . . utterly misplaced, considering the monsters inhabiting it. 
But then, I didn’t subscribe to Better Homes and Demons. 

Then we kicked the door at the far end—well, / kicked it—and found the 
spawning vats themselves. 

Huge, metal containers they were, a heaping helping of pure evil; 
cisterns containing a weird, toxic-green junk, but not thick like the slime; 
inside each container was the body of a half-formed monster. 


Arlene, on a whim of personal revulsion against the aliens, shot one of 
the partly formed torsos. The wound sealed up with a giant sucking sound, 
and the creature continued cooking. “How do you stop something like 
this?” she asked. 

“T wish I knew. We can give up the hope of a finite number of the things. 
They must be genetically engineered soldiers. The alien mastermind, 
whoever or whatever it is, must be stealing our nightmares and producing 
them wholesale.” 

“Uh, yeah. I wonder how long it takes for a vat to finish producing a 
newborn monster?” 

Arlene held up her watch. Six minutes later the one she’d shot was 
finished, and none the worse for wear. She shot it again as it stumbled out of 
the vat. Again and again. Now the bullets worked. We repeated the 
experiment several more times at six minute intervals. 

“The fluid is life-preserving as well as life-producing,” I said. “But when 
a critter is born—” 

“In other words,” Arlene said, “we can’t do abortion, but we sure as hell 
can nail ’em as newborns.” She wrinkled her brow. “Let’s do a rough 
calculation: at six minutes to cook a monster, that’s ten creatures per hour 
per vat. Say sixty-four vats in the room, means 640 monsters per hour just 
from this one room. Christ! That’s fifteen thousand per day.” 

“There, ah... there could be scores of rooms.” 

“In a few days they could have an army of millions,’ Arlene said, 
finishing her number exercise. 

“We still have one chance, Arlene. Find the alien mastermind and 
destroy it.” 

“Yeah, that’s all we have to do,” she scoffed. ‘“Piece of cake.” 


26 


Too many, too many monsters, monsters, monsters,” I muttered. 

“Monsters, monsters everywhere,” she echoed. “I don’t suppose it 
matters if there are any new types. We’re doomed no matter what.” 

“Don’t say that, Arlene. We’ve been able to kill everything we’ve come 
up against so far. That matters. The weapons and ammunition give us a 
fighting chance.” 

“Rats in a maze,” she said in a tone of voice new to her. She sounded 
defeated. I didn’t like that one bit. “You were right, Fly. Even if we always 
find enough ammo, it won’t save us. There are millions of them. They are 
testing us.” 

They are! 

At a moment like this I realized how important it was that we had each 
other. I’d experienced this same sense of defeat on Phobos, and for less 
cause. Now it was my turn to encourage the natural fighting spirit that 
burned so deeply in her. 

“Then how we respond to this is part of the test, as well. We won’t defeat 
them by firepower. That’s only to buy us time so we can reason out a 
solution.” 

She looked at me without blinking and asked, “Fly, what if there is no 
solution?” 

“Don’t believe that!” I urged, and in so doing helped convince myself. 
“If they were unbeatable, they wouldn’t need to collect data on us.” 

That took some of the shadows out of her dark mood. “Don’t worry,” she 
said. “I won’t let you down.” 

She’d been my buddy, my pal. We’d been careful not to confuse the issue 
by trying to be lovers. But this was the right moment to take her in my 
arms, bring our faces close together and whisper, “It’s you and me. We’ll go 
to the end together. We’ll make them pay for everything.” 


“Outstanding,” she said breathily, transforming the traditional Marine 
bravado into something very different. A moment passed between us that 
reminded me of the time we could have been lovers and chose buddies 
instead. Now I kissed her hard and she responded. We might not have 
another chance. And we weren’t going any farther than this; not in a place 
where we could so easily be reworked into dead meat, still on the hoof. 

“T’m feeling better,’ she said. “My brain is working again. You know, 
we’re in a good spot to do some damage.” 

“Go on.” 

“The bottom level of Deimos, directly below us, is one huge tank that 
was eventually going to be filled with liquid oxygen.” 

‘What the hell for?” 

She flashed her sneaky smile. “You’ll love this. The UAC was thinking 
of using the entire moon of Deimos as a spaceship, too.” 

“You're kidding!” I said, but I could tell she wasn’t. 

“The idea was to move it to the asteroid belt and use it for a mining 
base,” she said, finishing the news flash. “When I first realized we were 
moving, I thought some of us might be back in charge here. Then I 
suspected the more horrible possibility of a human-alien alliance.” 

“Jesus, what a morbid imagination! How is it I never heard about this 
plan even in casual talk?” 

“There’s secret, there’s top secret, and then there’s ‘rat us out and we’ll 
push you out the airlock.’” 

“Point taken. If we’re going to find out what’s really going on, then, I 
think we need to go the same way as before. Down.” 

We hunted through the level, but couldn’t find an exit, a secret door, 
anything. While we were searching, Arlene’s mood improved. That we were 
still alive was a miracle. Any monsters who tried to have us for lunch would 
get a bad case of indigestion. No matter what we were up against, I was 
going to bet on human unpredictability. We hadn’t spent a couple of billion 
years clawing to the top of the food chain for nothing. 

“Fly, have you noticed how this section is shaped?” Actually, I hadn’t. 
We’d been working our way along the inside of the wall in search of 
switches. “It’s shaped like a skull,’ she said. 

“These guys are running out of ideas,” I answered. 

“Those two pillars over there,’ she said, pointing, “‘are the eyes.” 


“Cute,” I said. Less cute was the pumpkin that suddenly came out of 
nowhere and began firing at us. Arlene and I hadn’t shot anything in whole 
minutes. We deflated the pumpkin; and this one acted more like a balloon 
with the air let out that any of its brothers, as it zigged and zagged on the 
way down. 

We chased it beyond the two pillars, where we found its limp and leaking 
remains sitting like a cork on a narrow ladder-tube leading down. “At last,” 
she said, “a guidepost.” 

“Just what the place needs,” I concurred. 

And now what? Should we still continue “down”? Or was it time to 
settle once and for all whether we were bugging out and reporting or going 
after the mastermind ourselves? 

I stared at the tube. So far as I could tell, down was still the only way 
out. So far, our paths still coincided. 

But there would come a time when one of us would have to prevail: 
either Arlene’s romantic sense of duty to the entire human race, or my more 
practical duty to her as my buddy, as a Marine, and—all right, let’s face it— 
and as a man to a woman. 

We popped the “cork” and climbed down what seemed like two hundred 
meters, down into the heart of the lox tank. The climb was long enough to 
make us tired even if we weren’t carrying all the crap that was necessary to 
Keep us alive. By the time we reached bottom, my hands were aching and 
my right knee was acting up. I could imagine how Arlene was feeling from 
the way she tottered on her feet. I hurried over to catch her if she fell, but 
she recovered herself and made no comment. 

We found a cozy room with four doors and a single switch in the center. 
“Do you hear that?” Arlene asked. 

Until she mentioned it, I hadn’t heard anything but our heavy breathing; 
but then I noticed something so unbelievably loud that a deaf man should 
have felt it; concentration is a funny thing. 

It sounded like the World Trade Center taking a stroll just outside. 

We rotated slowly, tracking the noise, and I thought about that movie 
with the tyrannosaurus stomping around. 

“Well, Fly, what now? I doubt we could climb back up again.” 

I looked up; the hole we’d climbed through was far over our heads. “We 
already know there’s no way to get us out in that direction. We’re here; if an 


exit exists, it has to be through one of those doors.” 

“Besides, we came here to do a job, Fly, even if that means fighting 
Godzilla.” 

I shrugged; what else was there to say? “One switch; four doors. Which 
one does it open?” 

I went to a door at random and tried to open it manually. Nothing. It 
wouldn’t budge, even when I kicked it. The behemoth still marched back 
and forth outside, shaking the entire building with every step. 

“T can’t help it,’ I said at last, “I’m a born lever-puller.” 

“You're repeating yourself,’ Arlene repeated. 

She flattened against the wall as I slapped the switch, then joined her. All 
four doors opened smoothly, simultaneously. 

“Move out!” I shouted. 

As fast as we could, we bolted through the door and entered a tiny, 
garagelike room looking into a brilliantly lit, silver and white, chrome- 
covered keep—the size of Texas. Wings from the central room extended 
like an X into the huge tank. 

We slid outside on the double. The sound of the walking skyscraper 
inspired speed on our part—and that was without even bothering to look 
behind to see what was making all the ruckus. 

Halfway to one of the wings, I couldn’t stand the suspense; like Mrs. 
Lot, I looked back. 

I thought I’'d seen everything. After imps and demons and pumpkins and 
hell-princes, I'd be able to handle anything else they threw at us! At least 
that’s what I thought. 

I'd also thought the hell-princes were giants when I first saw them. My 
scale was in for a rude awakening. 

“Mother Mary!” I shouted involuntarily. The others weren’t monsters 
any longer, not compared to this! 

It stood five meters tall, with piston-driven legs supporting a body that 
must have weighed hundreds of tons. Deep within its massive structure 
came the grinding of many gears. The arms were also piston-driven, and the 
left arm ended in a huge box that didn’t look anything like a lunch box. 

“No!” This time it was Arlene who had glanced behind and echoed my 
opinion. Now that we’d had our turn at making noise, it was time for the 
colossus to speak. 


The scream of rage that came out of its mouth was so loud that it was as 
if the two long horns—one on each side of its head, and growing out so far 
as to end over the muscled shoulders—were actually 50,000-watt stereo 
speakers amplifying the sound so that everyone could hear it from Deimos 
to Phobos to Mars. 

While it roared, the arm with the box on the end pointed at us. That 
broke the spell. We were both very good at noticing anything pointing at us. 

We ran like hell itself was on our tail, up the left wing seconds ahead of a 
terrific detonation. A miniature cruise missile had missed us, impacting 
against the far wall. Even at a distance of two hundred meters, the explosion 
knocked us off our feet. 

We ran as we’d never run before. All the eighteen-wheelers in the 
universe were coming at us on a downgrade to doom. We needed an exit 
ramp. 

“Look!” Arlene screamed, pointing at a narrow hole where the wings 
joined the central building we’d just exited. She dived through without a 
hitch. Me, I got stuck—it was Phobos all over again! But I wasn’t going to 
waste an opportunity, even with the wits scared out of me. 

I turned and loosed a few rounds from my trusty rocket launcher. I 
figured, Why the hell not? 

The rockets struck dead-on—with no apparent effect. 

The titan roared; a good translation, I guess, would be, “Now it’s my 
turn!” 


27 


The steam-driven demon returned fire, striking the wall of the 
wing, blowing us to the ground. The good news was that this finished the 
task of getting me through the hole. 

We were so stunned, we could barely pick ourselves up from the floor; a 
floor that was shaking from the approaching leviathan. “Get up!” I said, 
grabbing Arlene by the arm and pulling her to her feet. The colossus 
stomped straight toward us, and I knew that a flimsy piece of wall would be 
like a piece of Kleenex to the thing even before he ripped through it without 
slowing down. 

We staggered in the other direction, up the other wing. “My right foot’s 
numb!” Arlene hollered. “It’s asleep!” I heard the fear in her voice. I’m sure 
she could hear the fear in mine, too. 

“Wake it up,” I said, and while she stomped her foot, forcing the blood to 
circulate, I fired a few more rockets at the monster. There was no effect 
worth mentioning. 

“This thing won’t die!”’ Arlene shouted as we ran. 

“Not without something heavier,’ I agreed. Arlene stared at the far wall 
and started mumbling to herself, obviously making thumbnail calculations. 
I added one and one, and got two human beings crazy with terror. 

As we rounded the corner of the next wing, we heard the steam-driven 
demon crunching after us. At least he wasn’t moving any faster than a brisk 
walk. At his size, if he didn’t tire, that walk would finish us. I didn’t want to 
think about the missiles he could fire. We turned another corner. So long as 
we heard him but didn’t see him, I figured we were doing our best. 

“Fly!” Arlene cried. “Near as I can figure, this room is much larger than 
the Gate gravity field the aliens set up.” She took another deep breath, 
coughed, continued: “The periphery of the room should be at normal 
Deimos gravity.” 


f°? 


“Close to zero, you mean.” 

“YES,” 

I froze, staring at the far wall. Something was nagging at the back of my 
brain. This was no time to ignore hunches, instincts, or sudden revelation. 
“Arlene, we’ve got to lure Godzilla out of the anomaly and into the normal 
gravity zone.” 

She didn’t ask why. She had a better question: “Which one of us?” 

She was right. The only way to do this was for one of us to get into the 
zone and taunt the creature until it charged. 

Arlene did some quick mind reading. “There’s only one choice,’ she 
said. “I’m faster, you lumbering ox.” 

I couldn’t argue with her about that. I was already a lot more winded 
than she. I used to kid her about having the fastest cleats in the Light Drop; 
now it was life or death riding on her foot speed. She must not have liked 
my expression. “Fly, it has to be me! Besides, you’re a much better shot 
with the rockets.” 

“Lot of good that’s done us.” 

“Tt’s the only weapon might even slow it down,” she insisted; and there 
was no arguing with logic. She stopped running and so did I. She put her 
hand on my cheek and it was warm and damp. We were both sweating like 
mad. “If I don’t make it,’ she said, forcing her breathing to slow, and the 
words to come out slow and easy, “it’s been a cool couple of years. Take 
care, Fly, and when you start firing those rockets, try not to mix me up with 
the big guy.” 

I wanted to say too much, so I only nodded and kept my mouth shut. She 
jogged toward the distant wall, looking back over her shoulder once. I felt 
like a heel, but she was right. Got sweat in my eyes, too. 

Then the biggest monster in the universe rounded the edge and loped by. 
It walked right by me, sniffed the air with nauseating nostrils, and stopped! 
That unbelievable head slowly began to turn in my direction. I gave myself 
up for dead . . . but Arlene had other ideas. 

She made so much noise she could have been a three-piece band. She 
caterwauled, taunted, laughed, pointed, howled and hooted, and tap-danced 
for a big finish. She passed the audition. 

The big mother raised its missile arm. Arlene, back against the wall in 
the corner, planted her feet firmly and shoved off, like a kid shoving off in a 


pool to get a head start at a swim meet. Darn near zero-g could be fun. 

She streaked sideways along the adjacent wall, and the missile impacted 
astern of her, pissing off the steam-demon. 

“Roaaaarrriritirgg ?gge errrrrraaaaaaaauuughghh,” it complained, 
stomping after her. She crouched, safe in a corner, watching every move the 
enemy made. When Godzilla stopped halfway and fired another three 
missiles, she was ready for it. She timed her leap to take her farther along 
the back wall, out of the blast radius. 

As the demon pumped after her, I had a clear view from behind, and 
noticed that a whole rack of small missiles was built into the creature’s 
back! What did that say about the thing’s creators? 

Then, one cannonball-crashing step past the invisible line did the trick, 
and the big guy launched into the air, smashing against the high ceiling. 
“Welcome to the gravity zone, sucker!” I yelled, then stepped out of cover 
and fired a barrage of rockets at a target that was just too damned big to 
miss. Hell, Lieutenant Weems could have hit this one. 

The rockets exploded against the demon, knocking it farther back against 
the wall. This got its attention. Eyes big as dinner plates looked at me in an 
unkindly fashion. The demon raised its arm, but didn’t fire. This was 
because it was slowly rotating in the air like a windmill. Good old zero-g! 

Every time it lined me up for a shot, it had shifted again. And while it 
was unable to steady itself, I kept firing rockets. By the time it managed to 
stabilize itself and line up a shot, I had pumped a total of fifteen rockets. 
Fifteen, and it didn’t give a spit! 

Realizing that sooner or later the steam-demon might get off a missile in 
my direction, I made plans. 

The essence of virtually every martial art—and they taught us a lot in the 
Light Drop Infantry—is to use the other guy’s own weapons against him. 
Like, what the hell? What did I have to lose except my life, and all Earth? 

I stood perfectly visible and stopped shooting; I wanted that titanic SOB 
to finally bring its missile launcher to bear. Sounds stupid, I know . . . but it 
really was all part of the plan. 

I meant to do that! 

Behind me the walls came to a point, and there was another hole in the 
wing just begging for me to fill her up. I waited until the steam-demon drew 
a bead on me . . . then I dived into the slit as it fired. By the time the cruise 


missile impacted against the wing wall, I'd rolled on the other side of it, 
protected. 

What happened next was in the hands of Sir Isaac Newton. 

The force of the shot threw the demon backward against the wall with 
such terrific force that five meters of solid monster was torn to shreds. 

It sounded as if an entire supermarket had been slam-dunked into the 
side of a mountain. The next sound was music to my ears: Arlene giving a 
war cry of such glee and joy that I wanted to join her around some 
prehistoric campfire to gloat over the dead enemy and marvel at our own 
survival. 

I still exercised some caution as I peeped around the wall. A few lights 
still flashed and flickered on the demon as it feebly tried to crawl. But this 
baby wasn’t going to bother us anymore. 

“Shall we put it out of our misery?” asked Arlene as she rejoined me. 

“Does it deserve so merciful a fate?” I asked. She raised an eyebrow in 
surprise. Sometimes I think she underestimated my intelligence. What, only 
girl Marines can get away with sounding pompous? 

“Best to play it safe,’ she said. “I don’t want to get back on that merry- 
go-round.” 

I nodded. It only took the rest of my rockets, fired point-blank, to turn 
the prone body into cotton candy. “Whose turn is it to name the new 
monster?” I asked when the job was done. 

“You saw it first,’ she said. 

“All right, then: steam-demon. That’s what I kept thinking when I 
watched it move.” 

“Not bad, Fly. You’re getting better at this. Maybe you could be a 
writer.” 

“No need to be insulting,’ I said, patting her on the head in a patronizing 
way. This time I could get away with it. I felt good. It’s not every day you 
trick an unstoppable force into an immovable object. 

We explored and found a huge, round manhole in the floor near where 
the demon was originally standing. Perhaps it had been performing guard 
duty. Arlene did the inspection and laughed. “You’re going to love this,” she 
said, standing up. 

“Let me guess. It needs a key.” 

“You don’t like having to mess with keys, do you?” 


“Not when I’m fresh out of rockets.” But we had plenty of time for a 
scavenger hunt. Great. Whoever came up with the need for all these keys 
was on a par with the guy who invented cross-merging back on Earth. No 
torture too severe. 

“T'll bet I know where it is,’ Arlene said. Following her lead, we returned 
to the still-sparking, burning body of the steam-demon. Arlene found a key 
stuck in a slot in the creature’s belly. So he had definitely been the guardian. 
She started to pull it out and quickly yanked her hand away, cussing. 

‘““What’s the matter?” 

“It’s freakin’ hot!” Being careful not to burn herself on the quickly 
slagging metal, she gingerly extracted it, shielding her eyes from the heat 
with her other hand. Wisps of steam rose off the purple computer key card, 
but it retained its shape. She grinned like a kid who’d just gotten the prize in 
the cereal box. 

We ran to the door in the floor, the hole for a mole. Arlene plugged it 
into the slot. The hatch rose, then rotated open. Through this opening we 
saw a brilliant, eye-hurting red. A rickety, wooden ladder descended out of 
sight. “I can hardly believe it,’ she said. 

“Believe what?” 

“Has to be, babe. Fly, we’re looking right at the wall of the hyperspace 
tunnel itself.” 

We looked long and hard. “Now what?” she asked. 

I shrugged. When there’s no data, flip a coin. After all, the ladder wasn’t 
even charred. 

I reached my naked hand down into the red-red-redness. I touched a 
color. Arlene touched my shoulder. 

“What does it feel like?” she asked. 

I told her: ““You’d think it would be hot, but it isn’t. It’s ice-cold.” 

“Weird,” she said, and put her hand down next to mine. “So what’s 
outside a hyperspace wormhole?” she asked. 

“Outer space?” I suggested. “That river of faces we saw earlier? Heaven 
and hell? Death?” 

We glanced at each other and nodded. Holding hands, we took a deep 
breath and stepped into the redness. 

Crimson red. Fire-engine red. Rose red. Bloodred. Lipstick red. Martian 
red. The color curled around us like cold, smothering, arctic water, filling 


our brains with the redness of death. We were on fire! But I felt no pain. 
The experience was not pleasant. The flames burned away our clothing 
and weapons, but not our skin. 
The ladder vanished; it was only in our minds, anyway. For a while we 
slipped and slid as if we were at a crazy amusement park; but at least we 
could see. No matter how bad a situation, I was always grateful for light. 


28 


The red tunnel was bathed in the kind of hazy glow you get ina 
dark room when you’re developing photos. So long as I could see my hand 
in front of my face, I wasn’t going to freak. But that was the only good 
thing about the situation. 

Then we fell into a room. Room? Some sort of internal organ . . . the 
walls, floor, and ceiling were pink, pulsating flesh, ribbed and liberally 
coated with slippery mucus. 

Once again both Arlene and I were naked as jaybirds. Instinctively, I 
covered myself again, just as I had before. 

“Oh, come on, Fly!” Arlene complained. “You’re a human being, thank 
God. We have little enough to remind us of who we are and why we’re 
here ... we don’t need you being shy on top of everything else.” 

I slowly took ray hands away. But I tried not to look to hard at Arlene—I 
didn’t trust myself. We were buddies; I wanted it to stay that way. 

“This place stinks,’ Arlene said. Maybe my nose had stopped working. I 
counted myself lucky; the organ was diseased, sickly, and I was glad I 
couldn’t smell it. There was a downward slope that wasn’t so steep as to 
cause us to lose our footing altogether, but I wasn’t comfortable as we 
stumbled through the giant organ. I had a disturbing sense of what organ it 
was ...a place we’ve all been before. 

“T just had a bad thought, Fly; I hope whatever burned away our clothes 
didn’t also burn away all the microbes in our guts that help us digest food. 
Without them, we’ll die of starvation no matter how much we eat.” 

“T doubt it,’ I said, my voice shaky, as if I hadn’t used it for decades. “I 
don’t feel ravenously hungry, so evidently the Gate left the MRE food in my 
stomach. Probably left the microbes, as well . . . anything organic.” 

We both jumped when the demonic uterus started contracting. I had 
always hated amusement parks. Then we were sliding out of control. I 


grabbed Arlene’s hand and she squeezed hard. 

The contractions pushed us along the floor to a “door,’ a giant, 
semitransparent cyst membrane with a doorknob in the middle. The knob 
was made of some kind of cartilage. I pushed my arm into a wet opening all 
the way to the shoulder and turned the knob. 

Two corpses were on the other side. They’d only been shadows seen 
through the membrane; we couldn’t tell what they were. 

One was male, the other female. After our experience with deja vu, I 
experienced a momentary shock of thinking the bodies were our own! They 
weren’t, but they could have been related to us—similar body types, similar 
faces. 

I sure as hell knew who they were, though: one was the third woman in 
Fox Company besides Dardier and Arlene, Midori Yoshida. 

The man was Lieutenant Weems. 

I felt a curious lack of emotion, looking at the pair. They lay in an 
awkward position, head-to-head, each with a pistol in the other’s mouth. It 
was pretty clearly a suicide pact—I supposed because of finding themselves 
in hell. 

Arlene leaned down to separate them, and we made a horrific discovery: 
they weren’t just lying tete-a-tete; their heads were joined together, fused at 
the crowns, the scalp flowing smoothly from one to the other . . . like 
Siamese twins joined at the head. The hair color faded continuously from 
blond (Weems) to black (Yoshida) without seam or break. 

“Jesus and Mary,” I gasped. 

“I don’t guess there’s any question why they blew their brains out,’ 
Arlene whispered, dropping the bodies. 

Arlene silently pointed to bloody imp prints all around the bodies. We 
both knew the shape of an imp footprint when we saw one. Judging from 
the depth of the heels, the bastards had been dancing around the bodies of 
their human victims. I spat at one of the footprints. Arlene gripped my 
shoulder. 

“Fly, please don’t think I’m a ghoul—but goddamn it, we need those 
pistols! And much as I like looking at your . . . your manly chest, I think we 
need the clothes, too. Definitely the boots.” 

She had a point. A stomach-turning, revolting point; but still one against 
which I couldn’t argue. 


We spent the next several minutes robbing the corpses and throwing up 
in the corner. But afterward we each had a pistol and twenty-six rounds. 

To exit the room we had to squeeze through a narrow opening that 
looked exactly like . . . well, I didn’t like to even think about it. 

I volunteered to go first, and she didn’t object. “Fly,” came her voice as 
we wriggled and writhed through the orifice, “do you ever get the feeling 
you’re being born again?” 

I’m not a huge fan of morbid jokes; this time all I could do was shudder. 
‘“Arlene—maybe we shouldn’t be pissing off the only friend we’ve got 
down here by blasphemy.” 

The moist, decaying walls pressed in around my shoulders, but I could 
still push through, and where I went it was easy for Arlene to follow. The 
thought crossed my mind that the passage might narrow so much that I’d 
become stuck. I wasn’t completely rational about this one. 

I was so glad to pop out the other end that I barely minded the seven 
imps waiting on the other side. For one truly insane moment I wondered if 
that would make Arlene Snow White! Then I was busy again, doing my job. 
Arlene was right behind me, doing her job. We only had a brace of pistols. 
The sons of bitches didn’t stand a chance. 

As was the usual case after a good killing, we took advantage of the 
opportunity to do more sightseeing. Not once did I regret that neither of us 
had thought to bring a camera. “So this is hell,’ Arlene said. 

“What they want us to think of as the infernal regions,’ I replied. Hell 
was made of fleshy walls, an open field whose ground was a mottled scalp 
with comically giant, prickly hairs growing out of randomly scattered tufts, 
rivers of fire, a black and red swirling sky . . . and air that stank of urine, 
decayed flowers, and bitter lemons. There may have been a hint of old cat 
boxes mixed in there as well. “Come to think of it,’ I continued, “‘not a bad 
try.” 

“One of their more creative efforts.” 

We saw a single door, sagging with moldy, rotten timbers. The 
stonework lintel was crumbling. Arlene strolled to the unpromising portal 
and made a close inspection. “Fly, come look at this.” 

I went, but my stomach wished I hadn’t. There were mites or larvae 
eating away at the stone, the wood, the fleshy walls, everything! “Quite an 
attention to detail,’ Arlene said as if evaluating an artwork. 


The next moment she stopped being an art critic. A cloud of the tiny 
creatures came off into the air as if we’d pounded on the door, but neither of 
us had touched anything. They settled on her. More followed and they 
settled on me. Holding up my hand, I could see dozens of little specks 
spreading across my flesh . . . and there was a very slight itch. 

“Damn it, get off’n me!” Arlene shook her arms wildly, but enjoyed no 
more success than I. We ran, rolled, and still the little vermin hung on. They 
were worse than lint. 

“Ah, the hell with it,’ I said. “They don’t seem to be killing us. First 
chance, we’ ll take a bath.” 

“Or go through a teleporter,’ she said. 

“Being living organisms, they would probably go through with us. No, 
we'll look for water.” 

“Or flea dip.” She probably had a very good idea there. But her voice 
cracked; she held on by main force. 

“Can’t stand here forever,’ I said. “Let’s pop it.” 

I cracked the seal. Surprise! A pair of larger than life pumpkins floated 
out. At least they weren’t going to crawl around on our skin. They were up 
high enough that we ducked and managed to avoid being seen. They sailed 
past, looking for hoops and nets. 

The pumpkins saw the dead imps and floated over to investigate, 
providing us with the opportunity of darting through the doorway. Inside we 
found a single shotgun and a few shells. Arlene picked it up and tossed it to 
me. 

I was touched. We soldiered on. 

To the left we saw a rickety, wooden walkway over a pool of boiling, red 
stuff that seemed to be a cross between lava and the traditional green toxin. 
Annoyingly, it was the only way to go. As we began to cross cautiously, the 
path started to give way. For some reason, neither of us was the least bit 
surprised. 

There was nowhere to go but forward before the pathetic bridge 
collapsed into the evil fluid below. We ran like hell. But at the end we were 
blocked by what appeared to be a solid stone wall. 

I threw myself at the wall, hoping to grab a handful, and Arlene could 
grab me. Instead, we ended up very much alive on the other side of the 
illusion. There was no wall. 


If we were startled by the turn of events, the imps we had landed on were 
downright stunned. The shotgun lost its virginity then and there. Arlene 
took care of a few stragglers with her 10mm. 

This time, when we lifted our eyes from the carnage of the moment we 
were in for a real surprise. Right in front of us was the figure of a human 
being wrapped in something sticky and suspended from the ceiling by his 
feet. 

We could tell by his clothing that he was a UAC civilian. We could tell 
from his groans that he was alive. 

He was tall, nearly two meters. He was overweight and suffering a lot 
more because of it, the stomach hanging at a painful angle, his belt about to 
come loose. Blood trickled down his wrists from where he had tried to free 
himself. 

“God, he’s still kicking,” Arlene said, focusing on the only important 
thing. 

I looked close; the man appeared to be wrapped up in spiderwebs; the 
web suspending him from the ceiling was thick and didn’t look like we 
could easily break it. 

“Ts there a knife anywhere?” We pulled UAC boxes over and rummaged 
through them; no knife, but a bottle would break to serve the purpose. 
Arlene sliced, and I cushioned his fall as he came down, grunting at the 
weight. Good thing there were some medical supplies in the UAC boxes; 
the man was in shock. Arlene pushed some DSW saline to pump up the 
volume; after a while his eyes opened. He stared at us without 
comprehension. I expected that. 

“Can you hear me?” I asked, and got nothing. “If you understand me, 
nod your head.” 

That took a moment but he finally nodded. Arlene massaged his neck 
and I held a finger in front of him until he focused on it. “Are you all right?” 
Arlene asked him at last. 

“Unh,” he grunted in a low, husky voice, carrying all the pain. 

“Who are you?” I asked. 

“Bill Ritch,” he said, groggily. 

“How long were you up there?” Arlene asked. 

Further proof that life was coming back into him was the way he 
shuddered. “Long enough that I thought I’d died.” 


“Who put you up?” I asked. 

“The—goblin,” he answered. “Spidermind.” 

Oh, great; a whole new nomenclature. That narrowed it down to any of 
the monsters. If we ever reported to Earth, we would need to settle on a 
common terminology. 

“Congratulations,” said Arlene. 

“For what?” he asked, half turning to her, still dizzy. 

“Surviving.” It was a big deal finding another human who could move 
and wasn’t a damned zombie! We would have opened a bottle of 
champagne and celebrated if we’d had the time . . . or the booze. As it was, 
Ritch was stunned to receive a mouthful of cold water, if still a bit confused. 

Following a corridor that looped around, we wound up back at the same 
damned central entrance. I would never enjoy an amusement park again. 
Peeking cautiously around the corner, I saw we had company, tired of 
inspecting the dead imps outside. Pumpkins in the air, pumpkins 
everywhere... 

They roared in frustration and shot their nasty little balls of electricity at 
each other. Important datum: pumpkins are immune to their own weapons. 
And I made a note to see how they responded to being baked in a pie. 

“Were those the goblins you meant?” Arlene whispered to Ritch. He 
shook his head, but his grim expression left no doubt that he’d encountered 
pumpkins before. 

“They’re so freaking stupid,” said Arlene contemptuously. 

“You'd think something that was all head would have more brains,” I 
added. 

The next step was obvious for those of us with brains. We dashed across 
the corridor to another closed door. I opened it a crack while Arlene kept 
watch, making sure the pumpkins didn’t float back, Ritch obviously hadn’t 
received military training, but he caught on fast. Considering what he’d 
been through, he was a quick study. He kept pace, which was all we really 
needed from him at the moment. 

Through the door I saw two pumpkins on the inside as well, hanging 
with a bunch of imps. Taking a deep breath, I waited until a mob of spinys 
marched between the door and the nearest pumpkin. Then I stepped out and 
fired five or six unaimed rounds. These guys didn’t merit any wasted 


shotgun shells. Having done my damage, I popped back and braced the 
door. Arlene and Ritch helped. 

One thing you can say about pumpkins: they don’t let a little obstacle 
like imps stand between them and a target. 

And one thing you can say about imps: they don’t like being shot by 
balls of electricity. 

We left them to each other’s mercies. Over the sound of carnage, Ritch 
shouted at me. “How’d you get them fighting each other?” 

“We do it all the time,” said Arlene, smiling. “It’s the Iago tactic.” 

“T’m impressed.” 

I watched for the two in the hall; but they’d gotten tired of shooting each 
other and returned to shoot the imp carcasses. 

When the sounds behind the door died down, I slowly cracked it. I saw a 
lot of dead imps on the floor and the remains of one deflated pumpkin on 
top. I assumed the other one must be on the bottom of the pile. That’s when 
I made a huge mistake. 


29 


Stepping inside, I didn’t think to look behind the door, straight up, 
the logical place for a surviving pumpkin to be waiting in ambush. And 
that’s exactly where the bastard was. 

“Fly!” Arlene shouted. She was paying attention. She never used that 
tone of voice except when it was life and death—and in this case, the issue 
was my life. I threw myself on the floor just as a lightning ball fried the tip 
of my scalp. A run of 10mm rounds got my attention. 

I flipped over to see Arlene blasting away, then scrambled to my feet and 
pumped my shotgun at the floating head. She split left and I right, and we 
kept firing. 

When we were done, that was the deadest pumpkin I had ever seen still 
floating. It was almost like one of those old cartoons where the character 
hangs in space for several seconds before it remembers the law of gravity, 
then quickly plummets to the ground. All that was missing were the sound 
effects. 

“Incoming!” yelled Ritch, outside the door. We hadn’t forgotten the other 
pumpkins. We’d hoped they might have forgotten us, though. 

“Get in!” Arlene yelled, pulling at Ritch’s sleeve. He didn’t need another 
hint. The moment he joined us, we slammed the door shut and jammed the 
latch with Arlene’s pistol. The latch immediately rattled; God only knew 
what the pumpkins were using for hands. 

“Look,” Ritch said, pointing. Protruding from under a dead imp were the 
pieces of a box of shotgun shells, along with shells. 

“They may be covering all kinds of supplies,” I said. The prospect didn’t 
appeal to me, but I thought I should set a good example. Getting on my 
knees, I pulled the corpse away from the box, and dozens of shells went 
rolling as Arlene and Ritch collected them. 


Then we all got busy moving the dead monsters and stacking them in 
one corner. We received our just reward. There was another functional 
shotgun, lots of ammo, even tools: hammers, nails, even a gas-powered 
chain saw. Maybe the zombies had been used to build condos for imps and 
pumpkins. We even found an antique revolver for Ritch; I wondered which 
one of us the civilian would accidentally shoot. 

We replaced the pistol in the latch with a handful of nails, then collected 
all the tools and put them in a neat pile for later use. Weapons and ammo in 
hand, we explored the room and found it led to a broader plaza area. Then 
we found a door leading into a narrow corridor. 

“Tl go first,” I said. 

“Fine with me,” said Arlene. Ritch was more than happy to bring up the 
reat. 

No good deed goes unpunished. I realized that the moment I heard the 
familiar pig-grunting noises, the ugly snuffling that always turned my 
stomach and might keep me from ever eating bacon again. They didn’t 
make us wait very long. The demons came storming down the corridor, pale 
pink flesh with claws and lots and lots of teeth. 

Somehow, though, after the steam-demon, I couldn’t take the pinkies 
seriously. 

The narrowness of the corridor meant I had taken point with a 
vengeance; no one could shoot past me. I loosed a shotgun blast. “Fall 
back!” I shouted, and heard Arlene and Ritch doing it. Taking steps 
backward, I never took my eyes off the enemy. I shot a second time, then a 
third and fourth time, before dropping the first demon. 

I didn’t like the arithmetic. Despite our extra ammo, there were more 
demons than we could take down at this rate. My comrades had made it 
back through the door as I held the corridor. Back to the wall, I kept firing, 
when suddenly ... 

“Hold fire!” It was Arlene’s voice, and I couldn’t imagine that she’d 
gone nuts. I risked turning my head. She stood in the doorway, holding the 
chain saw. Then with a chugga-mmmmmm, chuggga-mmmmmm, she pulled 
the cord. Third time was the charm, and it kicked to life with an honest roar 
to drown out all but a steam-demon’s scream. 

Elbowing past me, she lifted the buzzing blade and let the teeth bite into 
the nearest demon. “Die, Pinkie, die!” she screamed. It sounded odd, but the 


results were great: red blood splashed us both, and she kept at it, screaming 
a war cry that just might scare a fallen angel. 

Arlene waded through them, working the saw, beads of sweat and drops 
of blood covering her face. A demon arm fell to the floor, blood exploding 
in a torrent. She slipped on the gore, but the movement carried her forward 
and the saw buried itself in the chest of the next demon, ripping a death 
gurgle from the creature. 

I tried to get to her to help, but the demon corpses were in the way. She 
worked the chain saw loose but fell backward, swinging it in a wide arc. A 
large demon swung its claw down hard and knocked the chain saw out of 
her hand. 

Before Arlene could get away, another claw ripped her open. She didn’t 
scream but fell silently. 

The sight drove me mad. Somewhere in the back of my mind I’d 
accepted the likelihood of our being blown to bits; but I wouldn’t have us 
die like animals! 

Picking up the saw, I revved it and finished the damned job, shoving the 
blade into the face of the one who had hurt her. I lost count of how many 
were left but I kept at it, swinging the chain saw back and forth, covering 
the walls with gore. Finally, there was nothing left to kill. 

The red haze lifted and I remembered Arlene. Turning back, I saw that 
Ritch was with her, trying to stanch the bleeding with improvised first-aid. 
My right sleeve was already in tatters, so it was a simple matter to rip off a 
strip of cloth and use it for bandages. We patched her up as best we could. 

Her face was pale and she was weak; but she was alive. “Can you 
move?” I asked. 

“Move or die,” she wheezed, “so Pll move.” We helped her stand up. I 
started to pick up her shotgun and pass it to Ritch, but she shook her head. 
“That’s mine,” she said, reclaiming it proudly. I wasn’t about to argue. 

We left the heavy chain saw on the deck and staggered forward into a 
last chamber. There were disgusting things lying around, but as nothing was 
moving or alive, I gave it no further attention. In the center of the room was 
a teleport pad of rusted metal, designed in a heavy and cumbersome 
manner. It looked like an antique. 

“That doesn’t look promising,’ I said. 


“We have no choice,’ Arlene answered through clenched teeth. We 
hadn’t had a good choice in a long, long time. All three of us stepped 
aboard, arms linked. Ritch must have been religious. He said a prayer. 

Maybe because it was an old-fashioned teleporter, the experience was 
different from the others . . . like the special F/X were provided by a 
different company. I noticed sounds that were new, a wind tunnel combined 
with an avalanche; and there was the sensation of falling turning into 
floating. Then we arrived. 

“Wow!” Ritch said. He wasn’t as used to this stuff as we were. The 
terminus was a rock garden. Although the light was dim, we could make out 
the twisted, curved, and warped rocks that made me think of a giant coral 
reef, except the color and texture of the formations was the same as desert 
camo. Met our old friends, the zombies. 

Arlene fired first. The opportunity to fight put life back in her again. 
Most of these zombies weren’t armed—ex-UAC civvies—which was fine 
with me. Ritch got off a couple of shots as well; I don’t know if he hit 
anything. Abruptly, I realized we had a more serious problem than the 
walking dead crew. I'd almost forgotten the real spooks—the ghost things I 
thought of as specters. 

One touched my face with all the coldness of space. I hit at the horror 
wildly but struck Ritch instead, knocking him to the ground. It was joined 
by some of its buddies, those flying metal skulls I hoped never to see again. 
They dive-bombed us like kamikaze pilots. 

Then Ritch found the back of a specter head by swinging his hands; he 
put his revolver against its skull and squeezed off a point-blank round. 

That got the critter’s attention; it spun to deal with Ritch, turning its back 
on me; I blew its head apart with the riot gun. 

Somehow the idea of a ghost you can slice and dice appealed to me. I 
didn’t think the nuns would approve. The damned specter went down 
screaming like a banshee and bleeding something that stank of ice-cold 
graveyards. 

While I was auditioning for Ghost Busters, Arlene popped the flying 
skulls. They didn’t require as much firepower as the pumpkins. Ritch took 
care of the remaining zombies. 

“Aim for the head, just like the movie,’ Arlene shouted. 


He was doing okay for a novice, and naturally gravitated to the easiest 
job; but he acquitted himself well. I was happy we had found him. 

Finally the wave of bad guys subsided and we could play beachcombers. 
There wasn’t much worth grabbing this time, however—only a bit of ammo 
and a Sig-Cow for Ritch from the poorly equipped zombies. 

Now seemed a good moment to find out more about Bill. Arlene thought 
his “goblin” might be a hell-prince and described one, but he shook his 
head. “Not a minotaur; it was more like a giant spider,” he said. 

“Oh, great,’ said Arlene, “‘a new one for the files.” 

We found out Bill Ritch was a computer programmer. If we found any 
monsters with laptops, he would prove invaluable. To be fair, he’d done fine 
killing his quota of zombies. 

‘“How’d you get captured in the first place?’ Arlene asked. 

Ritch sighed. “Classic case of ‘this can’t really be happening to us.’ 
When we were—” He stopped, face turning red. When he started up again, I 
knew he had skipped something important. Later, I thought. “We were 
studying the Gates, and suddenly one of them on Deimos experienced a 
marked drop in temperature. It started glowing, too.” 

“But I thought Deimos was deserted when all this started,” I interrupted. 

“You were supposed to think that,’ he said. “When the UAC found alien 
electronics and started—then we all crowded in to see, and that’s when they 
started coming through, the goblins. Aliens, I mean.” 

“Which ones?” I asked. “Which ones came first?” 

“The first thing through was one of those things you call an imp. It 
looked at us and grinned, and we were all frozen in total shock. We didn’t 
know what to say or do—our first contact with an alien race, and we were 
speechless! All those wonderful plans about what we were going to say and 
how we were going to react—” 

“Well, how did the imp react?” Arlene was always good at cutting 
through the plastic to get to the meat. 

Ritch shook his head sadly, remembering something painful. “It threw 
one of those wads of phosphorous mucoid and killed a senior scientist and 
two Air Force captains. I was in the back . . . thank God. A woman 
screamed; I think it was Dr. Tyya Graf. Then another one came through, and 
we panicked.” 

“Mob scene?” 


“Like Soylent Green.” Arlene mm-hmmed, but I was confused. Must 
have been another old movie reference. “If I hadn’t been such a big guy, I 
would have been trampled. As it was, I was knocked down. I tried to get up, 
and they squirted some sort of webbing around me, a neurotoxin that 
paralyzed me. 

“T was out of it for some indeterminate time; when I came to, this spider 
thing was interrogating me and I was in a huge room, surrounded by 
hundreds of goblins of different types, and even some of those zombies. I 
recognized Dr. Graf, but I could tell right away she was dead and her body 
was just reanimated. And, well, that’s the story.” 

Speaking of which, Arlene interrupted with her own thoughts: “Fly, do 
you notice there’s a lot more zombie bodies here than anything else?” 

“Sure.” 

“So with all the noise we just made, why didn’t a lot more come 
running?” 

“Curiosity may have killed the cat,’ I said, feeling flip, “but never a 
zombie. Or maybe this is all of them.” 

“No brains,” said Ritch, bending over one of them. 

Arlene shook her head. “I think it’s because they never do anything 
they’re not told,’ she said. “They must stay in constant communication with 
someone or something, and only go investigate when they receive a 
command. If they’ve been told to patrol, looking for humans, then they’ll 
attack; otherwise, they might march right by us and not even see us.” 

“That imp who talked to me made me wonder if imps give them orders,” 
I said. 

“Maybe; but we’ve seen zombies where there are no imps. Maybe they 
get standing orders. I saw a bunch of imps come running to check out a 
situation once where all I’d done was get the zombies firing at each other. 
The imps couldn’t control them.” 

“Well, the pig-snuffling demons don’t have any intelligence worth 
mentioning, either,’ I said. “If there’s any more of them around, they 
wouldn’t hear a battle over their own breathing.” 

“The skulls don’t even have ears,’ Arlene said. “Look, it’s either hell- 
princes, the steam-demons, or that thing Bill described, the spider thing.” 

“The spider creature that interrogated me,’ Ritch said, shuddering. 


“We'll keep that in mind.” Time to move on. Hugging the right wall, we 
discovered a narrowing, “natural” corridor with more shotgun shells lying 
on the floor like popcorn. We scooped them up, but I was disappointed to 
discover that some were defective or spent. I was preoccupied with a 
handful of questionable-looking specimens when they spilled through my 
fingers and I dropped to my knees to recover them. That saved my life. A 
shotgun blast filled the space where my head had been a moment before. 

“Zombie!” Ritch called out anti-anticlimactically. No one ever shot at us 
with human weapons except former humans. Another shot missed high, but 
there was no third attempt on Yours Truly. 

Arlene turned to fire—and froze! “F-Fly . . 2’ she whispered hoarsely. 

I stared. Jesus; it was Arlene’s worst nightmare come true. Wilhelm 
Dodd, or what was left of him, lurched toward our little group, shifting his 
twelve-gauge to get a better shot. 


30 


Arlene stared at him approaching, her mouth open, face pale as a 
ghost. I didn’t want to do it, but she’d made me promise! 

Feeling sick, I raised my own weapon. I knew what would happen: I 
would blow the f’ing SOB away—and Arlene would hate me for the rest of 
her natural life .. . which might not be a very long time at that. 

Then a miracle happened. 

Just as my finger tightened on the trigger, Arlene’s face suddenly 
hardened. The color returned. She closed her mouth. 

Then she pumped a shell into the receiver, shouldered her riot gun, and 
blew the zombie-Dodd’s face off. 

Nobody said anything; Ritch took his cue from our awkward silence. I 
put my hand on Arlene’s shoulder, and she spoke. Her voice croaked like a 
rusty can tied behind a very old car. “He was already gone, Fly. And I didn’t 
want him to come between my buddy and me.” 

There was that damned peculiar lump again. I blinked—dust in my eye, I 
guess—and squeezed her shoulder so hard she winced. But she didn’t move 
to push my hand away. 

She knew what would happen if J were the one to kill the reworked 
Wilhelm Dodd . . . and she wouldn’t allow that to happen. 

Evidently, our friendship was as important to her as it was to me. 

I’d forgotten that the zombies had ever been human; I made myself 
forget. But the staring face of Willy Dodd wouldn’t let me get away with it 
any longer. He was a man, a Marine, and very important in my life. Now 
that he was gone—I didn’t know what to think about Arlene and me. 

Best not to think at all, I advised me; it was good advice, and I took it. 

Arlene was taking it hard. Sitting on the floor, she put her head between 
her legs and took a series of long, deep breaths. I wanted to comfort her but 
felt helpless. “Arlene . . .” I reached out to touch her. She shook her head 


and pulled away. Any other situation, I would have left her alone to mourn 
in private. But there was no privacy on Deimos except the solitude of the 
grave. 

Ritch understood what was going on and kept his mouth shut. I liked him 
more and more. I glanced at my wristwatch, a pointless act in this place, 
perhaps; but it helped somehow: a tiny act of useless normalcy. 

“Arlene,” I said, gently as I could, “we’ve got to split. You need to pull it 
together.” 

“Leave me alone!” she said, keeping her face turned away. “Don’t look 
at me.” 

This didn’t seem like a good time to push the envelope. I’d never seen 
her this badly shaken; without another word, I sat down, back-to-back with 
her, and kept watch while she got it out of her system. Ritch stood a little 
farther up the hallway, gun out, eyes averted. 

Every so often her entire body shuddered; I pretended not to notice. 
When she finished, she wiped her eyes and stood up. “Let’s move, 
Corporal,” she said. She was a PFC and I outranked her, but it was all right. 
The fighting tone of voice was back. 

Ritch rejoined us and we pushed on. Up the defile was a rise where we 
could peek over the rock wall to our left. The architect from hell had been 
busy again. A huge garden stretched out before us in the shape of a nght 
hand. We were in the thumb. 

“Can you believe this one?” Arlene asked. 

“Better than a swastika,” I said. The hand covered a good piece of 
territory, with the “fingers” wide spread, each undoubtedly offering a wide 
selection of motion sensors and other surprises. The “ring” finger had a 
bizarre, wooden shack right where the ring would have been; I wondered if 
the “pinkie” finger would be full of Arlene’s demons. 

We started with the thumb. “Bet the only prints we find are foot-prints,” 
Ritch said. Pve never liked stupid jokes, either, but Arlene laughed; 
anything to shake her out of her depression. 

I heard a familiar bubbling: the red “lava” liquid. The pool was in a 
raised, stone structure that could pass as the swimming pool from hell. I 
thought I saw a switch just below the lava line. 

“What’s that?” Ritch asked. 


“Toxic yecch,’ Arlene answered. “Haven’t you seen it before?” Ritch 
shook his head. “You’ve been lucky,” she went on. “Fly and I have been 
through an ocean of the stuff.” 

“Looks like lava,’ Ritch said, proving an old adage about great minds 
and small circles. “Is it hot?” 

“Not enough,’ I said, “but it can still kill you.” The switch teased me, 
like a piece of plastic sticking up from a bowl of red oatmeal. 

“You know,” I mused, “that switch is awfully tempting .. .” I found a 
rock and pitched it at the button, jumping back. I didn’t want any of that spit 
splashing on me. 

I should have tried out for the majors when the twelve-year strike began. 
First try was the charm; we heard a loud click, and a door rotated open, 
revealing our latest take-home pay: another AB-10, and far more important, 
a pair of beautiful Medikits. I would have preferred another of those 
magical blue health spheres, but this would definitely do in a pinch. 

But my heart sunk when I picked up the first one and saw the telltale 
signs of imp. This was not a virgin find. Tooth marks explained why most 
of the drugs were missing. Apparently the imps liked the taste. A hurried 
investigation of the kits showed that barely enough drugs had survived for 
Arlene. 

Ritch helped me gather together what we needed. After cleansing her 
wounds, with special care for the bad gash in her chest, I gave her 
painkillers and put on fresh bandages. Ritch seemed embarrassed, swabbing 
at her amble, naked breasts; but titillation was the last thing on any of our 
minds. 

““How’s that?” I asked. 

‘Better,’ she said, but I could tell from her strained voice and pale face 
that she was far from perfect. Better would have to do. 

The dregs of the drugs proved a bonus for Ritch. He didn’t look so hot, 
either. Coming down from the ceiling and snapping out of shock so quickly 
couldn’t be good for anyone, and he’d been holding his own in combat 
instead of resting. 

I wish I could have offered him a needle of the stimulant I’d used back in 
the marble room, on Deimos; but stimulant seemed to have been what the 
imps were after—the vials were all empty. 


Leaving the thumb, we descended on the palm as if storming heaven and 
began a serious housecleaning, sliding from rock to rock, blasting anything 
in our way .. . and scooping up anything useful. The opposition was feeble, 
hardly worth mentioning except to say that they died quickly. 

Arlene lucked into finding a rocket launcher of her very own. Then we 
helped her locate the little batterysized rockets that were nearby. She 
collected seven of the little darlings, and I showed her where to stick them 
and taught her the forbidden lore of proximity fuses and firing rings. 

We were so happy about the find that we must have sent out a subverbal 
signal. Monsters don’t like humans being happy. 

We were ambushed by six former comrades at arms and ex-UAC 
workers, four imps, three demons, two flying skulls, and a partridge in a 
pear tree. (I’m lying about the pear tree.) In the ensuing carnage, Arlene 
used up every rocket; but at least she could never again say she hadn’t been 
checked out on the launcher. 

Arlene and I barely worked up a sweat. Ritch was getting good at the 
game; he was a good draft pick. He’d been doing some thinking that he was 
eager to share with us. Arlene still seemed numb from the discovery of 
Wilhelm, but I was ready to get to know this new Ritch better. 

So, as we surveyed our latest gaggle of ex’s, I encouraged him to speak 
his piece. 

He’d already told us that computers were his area, but he’d been overly 
modest. Evidently, he was a bona-fide computer genius kidnapped from 
Deimos by the aliens. 

“We had already decided that the Gates were hypermass transportation 
devices; if they really worked and weren’t just some elaborate failed 
experiment from millenia past, it would blow every physics theory we had 
out the wash. 

“We discovered they responded to bursts of high-energy microwaves; 
their circuits responded for several seconds after each burst—not 
electronics, exactly, but something involving direct manipulations of 
particle streams.” 

As Ritch held court, Arlene perked up and started paying attention. She 
was getting that expression she wore when a boyfriend betrayed her. 
Suddenly, her mouth dropped. “You mean you—activated the Gates 


yourselves? You turned them on? Jesus Christ, you brought those things 
here!” 

Arlene had a romantic side that tried to believe whatever nonsense 
officials put out as the truth du jour. I’d gotten over that sort of silliness long 
before I joined the Corps—it wasn’t a long-term healthy attitude for a 
jarhead. 

“[... I think we brought these aliens through the Gate ourselves, in a 
way,” Ritch admitted pathetically. “But it was an accident!” 

“Ah, an accident,’ I snorted. “Well, that certainly relieves everyone of 
any personal responsibility.” 

Ritch continued, not noticing the irony. “I think, now, that whatever these 
creatures were, they were listening to the Gates. Maybe they were trying to 
fire it up from their end, and until we ‘answered the phone,’ they couldn’t 
do it. But yeah, I guess we let them in. 

“Anyway, I don’t believe these are the creatures that built the Gates.” 

“That’s what we figured,” I said. “You got anything more substantial than 
a gut feeling?” 

“The UAC has . . . engravings that the Gate builders left behind. They 
are as old as the Gates, showing what the Gate builders looked like.” He 
paused, trying to find the right words. 

“And?” we asked as one. 

“You're not going to believe this—” he started. 

“After what we’ve been through, we’ll believe anything,’ I said, 
launching a preemptive strike. 

“Well, they look like something out of H. P. Lovecraft,” he said. 

“T knew it,” Arlene said. She still looked furious. 

“Am I the only person in the solar system who never read this guy?” I 
asked, irritated. “The first one of you to talk about anything ‘eldritch’ is 
going to get a rocket right between the eyes.” 

Ritch looked at me like he thought I might be serious, but a big smile 
from Arlene put him at ease. He swallowed hard and said, “They have 
snakelike trunks with multilimbed upper torsos, no visible head; and they’d 
have to move like sidewinders.” 

“How big?” Arlene wanted to know. 

“Up to ten meters long,” he answered. They didn’t say it but I just know 
they were both thinking, Oooh, eldritch! 


I agreed. “I'd bet my life we haven’t met the real intelligence behind 
this.” 

Arlene joined in: “Bet something of more value than that, Fly. What 
value do you think an insurance company would put on us?” 

“IT don’t gamble,” Ritch said with a straight face, “and I have met the— 
what’d you call it? The mastermind. That spider thing . . . it’s in charge, I’m 
positive.” 

“Tell us more,’ I requested. 

He shuddered. I knew how he felt. Theory was one thing, close contact 
another. “So far as I can tell, the spider thing has real intelligence,” he said. 
“Tt spoke in clear English.” I wasn’t about to doubt him after my experience 
with the imp back on Phobos. 

“What did it say?” asked Arlene. 

“Well, first it started asking me questions. It started with simple, yes-no, 
true-false; I tried to lie a few times, but it already knew a lot, and I got 
caught.” 

‘“‘What was its response to a lie?” 

Ritch shrugged. “Didn’t seem to care emotionally; but it punished me. 
Horrible stuff, but all hallucination. You know how you’re having a dream, 
and you dream that you’re absolutely terrified? The spidermind thing can do 
that: I can see why people who encountered one of those, maybe thousands 
of years ago, could think they’d died and gone to hell.’ He shuddered at the 
memory. 

“But the fears were all unreal. And after a while I realized I could take it. 
You just have to accept being afraid like you’ve never been afraid before; 
but if it can’t break you with fear, it doesn’t know what to do next.” 

“What did it do to you?” 

“It started ordering me to reprogram all the Phobos and Deimos 
equipment. When I refused, it tortured me with more and more Fear Itself, 
which is what I started calling the hallucinations. When that didn’t work, it 
hung me from the ceiling with its webbing, like it was saving me for later.” 

“T got the impression it needed to find out more about humans so it could 
figure out how to crack us. Meanwhile, I think it went looking for a more 
cooperative programmer. I’m sure it would have killed me when it found 


29 


one. 


“To find out more about humans,” I repeated, feeling a chill. “Arlene... 
do you think all this crap that’s been thrown against us... ?” 

She glared at me, then glared at the deck. She knew what I meant; she 
knew it made sense. 

We had been the secondary information sources. Had we given the 
mastermind anything useful? Mater Dei, I hoped not. 

“Describe the monster,” Arlene said. 

Ritch gritted his teeth. “It’s like a huge, brainlike thing inside a 
mechanical, spiderlike body.” 

“What about the weapons?” I asked. 

“Ringed with more weapons than you can imagine,’ Ritch said. I 
doubted that. I’d reached the point where I could imagine quite a lot. 

Actually I was glad to receive Ritch’s news. A leader alien meant we had 
something to really fight. I was exhausted cutting off the inexhaustible 
limbs of this army. I was ready for a general. The new information cheered 
up Arlene as well, bringing color back to her cheeks. She and I didn’t need 
to talk about it. We were on the same wavelength. We shared our theories 
with Ritch, especially the one about Deimos as a spaceship and what we 
had discovered about the hyperspace tunnel. He had already guessed a lot. 

Then we continued our journey up the ring finger, where we’d seen the 
shack. We ran into one specter, hardly a match for the three of us. I couldn’t 
help contrasting our casualness now with my terror at seeing my first 
zombie. Nowadays, I was almost blase. 

We prowled our way up to the ancient, crumbly, wooded hut. Hell 
needed a facelift. 

“Check out the lock,’ Arlene said, grinning like a girl with a Christmas 
of accessories for her favorite doll. “I love these!” 

“Why?” I asked. 

“They take an old-fashioned key.” 

“T’ll help you look for it,’ Ritch said before I could. 

“Hell with that,” she said. “ve already got one!” She dismantled one of 
the pistols; then she took the gasexpander stablizer spline for a flexor and 
the fixed end of the magazine-advance spring for a tensor. It took her just 
five minutes to pick the lock. 

‘“‘Where’d you learn that?” Ritch asked. 

“T read a lot of comic books.” 


“You need help putting that back together?” I asked with a straight face. 
I couldn’t resist teasing her a little. She rolled her eyes and reassembled the 
piece in nothing flat. She made us wait until she was good and ready to 
open the shack door. 

Inside was a switch. Surprise, surprise, surprise . . . as our patron saint 
Gomer might say. Arlene did the honors, lowering the wall ahead, revealing 
a hidden platform containing a dozen dead, mangled, squashed imps and a 
teleport pad. 

“It’s about that time,’ she said. 

“T want a new travel agent,’ I said. 

We teleported and stared, stunned into angry silence. 

We were right back where we’d started after crawling down the 
hyperspace tunnel! The only improvement was we still had our clothes and 
weapons—and Ritch, of course. 


31 


Deja,’ said Arlene. 

“Vu,” I said. 

“Dejah Thoris,”’ Ritch said, and Arlene snorted. They were speaking 
some kind of secret code. I wasn’t going to worry about it. Starting all over 
was something to worry about. 

As before, I inserted my arm up to the elbow in the membranal switch 
and opened the door. Inside, we found Weems and Yoshida in the same 
room, same position, still joined head-to-head . . . and still holding their 
pistols in exactly the same position as before. Clothed! 

We stared for a long time, and poor Bill Ritch had no idea why Arlene 
and I were so stunned; he started to examine the bodies, but Arlene gently 
pulled him back before he could see what they’d done to them. 

“This is worse than the monsters,’ I said. We passed by and crawled 
through the narrow tunnel, a very tight fit for Ritch. 

When we reached the end, we faced the same seven imps as before, only 
this time we used shotguns. At least that was an improvement. 

We popped the same door. Out came two pumpkins, just like last time. 
The pumpkins were pretty much the same except for varying sizes. Arlene 
used the AB-10, and I finished them off with a shotgun, our favorite tactic. 
Ritch made a comment that was new: “They’d look better with two burning 
candles for eyes instead of that headlight in the center.’ No one argued. 

We started to bypass the collapsing pier, going for the other door instead; 
but suddenly Arlene said, “Fly, I have a feeling we should duplicate our 
actions as precisely as we can.” 

“Arlene, last time the demons creamed you in that narrow hallway,” I 
reminded her. She nodded, a bit shaky at the thought. She wasn’t in any 
condition to survive a bout like that again. I pursued the point: “We’ve 


already deviated by not taking Weems’s and Yoshida’s pistols and by killing 
the pumpkins outside.” 

“IT know,” she said. “I don’t have any good argument except for female 
intuition.” I was about to make a crack about the unlikelihood of that 
particular attribute in Arlene Sanders, but I saw that she was deadly serious. 
She glared at me until I saw reason. 

We left Ritch in the corridor. He wasn’t in shape for what we had in 
mind. Of course, after we cleared a path for him, he could stroll through in 
relative safety. We ran like bats out of Deimos down the pier, this time 
charging through the illusory wall of flame and blowing away the imps we 
knew to be on the other side. 

There was another reason I’d insisted we leave Ritch behind, one I kept 
to myself: I half thought we’d find a second Bill Ritch hanging from the 
ceiling here. 

We didn’t .. . and I never brought the subject up to Arlene or Ritch. God 
only knows whether they thought of it themselves—probably, but they kept 
quiet as well. 

We slipped back by the secret corridor and used the same trick on the 
pumpkins and imps inside the room. It was a lot easier when we knew what 
to expect. This time I knew where the last pumpkin would be floating in 
ambush when I opened the door, and I enjoyed not being surprised. Pop 
goes the pumpkin. 

Crossing the patio, Arlene grabbed the chain saw and revved it up; but 
she made me promise to start shooting the moment she lost it this time. 
Except that this time, since she knew what to expect, she didn’t slip and 
wasn’t out of position where a demon could knock the chain saw out of her 
hand. She ducked. She weaved. She sawed all the demons to death. It was 
hard to believe she’d been seriously injured only a short time before; but 
having a chance to get it right the second time did wonders for her 
psychological recovery. 

We continued up the narrow corridor to the teleport. “So what happens 
now?” I asked. “Back to the hand again? 

I should’ve kept my hole shut. We stepped aboard, but instead of 
teleporting, the walls of the chamber lowered into the floor, leaving us 
standing behind some pillars in a very wide open courtyard. 


A neat row of UAC boxes stretched across the courtyard before us like a 
skyscraper on its side. Every box held a five-pack of rockets—all the 
rockets in the world. There was also another launcher. 

A silver lining like this couldn’t possibly arrive without an 
accompanying thundercloud. We heard the thunder of the heaviest feet in all 
monsterdom. Another lovely steam-demon . . . and there weren’t any 
convenient zero-g zones around this time. 

“What the hell is that?” Ritch whispered, crouching behind a pillar. 

“That, my friend, is a steam-demon. Fifteen feet tall, long horns, a 
missile launcher for an arm—” 

“Oh, one of those,” Ritch said, nodding. 

“You know about them?” asked an incredulous Arlene. 

“Sure; I’ve just never seen one before. They ripped off my programming 
for an ore-crusher to run the creature.” His tone of voice was what you hear 
in small claims court, offended about business-as-usual. 

“Any way to sabotage it?” 

Ritch frowned in thought. A steam-demon was large enough to inspire 
frowns in anyone. “If you can get me around back, maybe,” he said. ““That’s 
where the missile feeder is.” 

“Worth a try,” I said. I looked at Arlene, and she nodded. We dashed out 
to either side of the pillars as the steam-demon spotted us. It was as ugly as 
last time, but not as terrifying when frozen in indecision about which target 
to attack. While it made up its mind, assuming it had one, Arlene and I fired 
rockets from opposite directions. 

At last the steam-demon chose the prettier target and raised its missile- 
launching hand. Arlene saw what was coming and dived behind her pillar. 
Three small cruise missiles struck dead-on, shattering the pillar. 

I jumped out and shot the sucker over and over until I got its attention. 
As the big ugly mother deigned to notice me, I popped behind my own 
column; Arlene repeated the same process, out from her cover and blasting 
away. It was kind of like dealing with the playground bully where the stakes 
were real. 

The steam-demon proved that it had a mind by passing our little 
intelligence test. It stomped closer to the pillars, cutting off our angle. 
Arlene was ready for this. She ran backward, zigzagging, popping off an 
occasional rocket. 


Time for Ritch’s plan. 

While all this was happening, Ritch and I were moving into position. 
When the monster was finally standing with its back to the pillars, lining up 
a fatal shot for Arlene, I interlaced my fingers, bent down, and let Ritch 
climb aboard. Heavy as he was, I could barely boost him up high enough to 
grab the back of Godzilla for the ride of his life. 

He shoved his hand into the missile-loading machinery up to the elbow. I 
ditched him, as agreed beforehand, and leapt to a safer position to try 
something else in case Ritch failed. 

Arlene was still dodging around as if she were an actress at a producers’ 
convention. She was too busy now to even take a shot. Besides, she wasn’t 
going to risk hitting Ritch. As for the behemoth, it hadn’t even noticed that 
someone was riding on its back. 

Then Ritch ripped out a cable, and the steam-demon noticed. 

It jammed its left arm back at an impossible angle; it could just barely 
brush Ritch, but couldn’t bring much force against him, not enough to 
dislodge him. 

The hand with the launcher had a better angle; the steam-demon got it 
back, pointed at Ritch, and I held my breath, expecting Armageddon. But at 
the last moment, rarely used self-preservation circuitry kicked in, 
preventing the big guy from firing into its own missile supply. The steam- 
demon alternately swatted at Ritch from both sides until our man finished 
his task and jumped down. 

Then Bill Ritch started running, headed in my direction. The steam- 
demon turned around with great deliberation and aimed its missile launcher 
at Ritch’s head. This was point-blank range. Ritch would never have to 
worry about a hat again. The monster fired. We heard a loud, empty click. 
Nothing happened. Ritch kept running. The steam-demon kept clicking, 
pointing and clicking, as if it couldn’t fathom the situational evolution. It 
flunked that intelligence test. 

Arlene didn’t waste the opportunity. She started pumping at it from 
behind. The poor bastard turned and aimed its useless arm at her. Click! I 
shot it three times with my own compact rockets. I kept at it, squeezing the 
ring until my palm became numb; after what must have been twenty-five 
direct hits at least, the titan finally staggered and fell to the deck like a 
skyscraper under demolition—I kept firing, and it got weaker and weaker. 


Then Arlene got smart, ran around back, and pumped a couple into the 
missile supply; the steam-demon’s last words were pretty spectacular. I was 
surprised the entire hyperspace tunnel didn’t collapse. 

I was tired. But Arlene and Ritch were still full of fire. 

We went back the way we’d come, but there had been a change in the 
architecture. Walls no longer stood where they had. Floor plans were 
different. A room that had been a small, empty antechamber was now a 
huge room with the equivalent of a “beach” against which red waves of 
toxin washed relentlessly. 

“Look!” Arlene said. I followed her pointing finger to the unwelcome 
sight of a hell-prince wading through the crimson toxic surf. After playing 
patty-cake with the steam-demon, a minotaur didn’t seem that serious—but 
back on Phobos, Arlene had ripped through a crack to avoid one, and I'd 
been almost paralyzed with fright. How times change! 

But it wouldn’t do to be careless. We took it left, right, left, right with 
rockets until it was slagged. It made one gratifying “Ork!” before dying. 

The long, narrow corridor where Arlene had chain-sawed the demons 
was now one edge of a triangular room full of specters. We gave that a pass, 
rushing through before the lumbering, invisible pinkies could avenge their 
more-visible cousins; we beat cleats back to the door leading to the central 
corridor and slamming it, jamming the latch with some 10mm rounds. 

We didn’t see anything in the corridor outside, so we went back along 
the secret passage by which we had exited from the room behind the 
illusory wall. From that room we could see that the lava lake now had a wall 
at the back, and next to it a corridor that offered the possibility of dry land. I 
was about to slog across the corridor when Ritch got into the act. 

“Why don’t you use the toxic protection suit?” he asked, pointing. 

“What? Where?” 

“See those coveralls?” 

Huh! I pulled one on over my armor and boots before making a dash 
through the crud to the island behind it. There, I found the damnedest rifle 
I’d ever seen, huge, gyrostabilized, and with a gigantic battery backpack. 
Hoisting it up, I was pleased that it was a lot lighter than it looked and 
considerably less unwieldy. Grinning like I’d won a bowling league trophy, 
I humped back to where the others were waiting. 


It was a good thing I followed Ritch’s advice on the protective suit; the 
toxic glop ate away at the material with a consistent low hiss for company. I 
started feeling lousy by the time I was out of the stuff, but at least I wasn’t 
in pain. Arlene reached out to help me climb from the red pool. 

“Get it off!” she said. “Your suit is disintegrating.” I eagerly stripped for 
her. She noticed a telltale bulge under the suit. “What’s this?” she asked. 

I looked at it. “It’s a... it’s a big, freaking gun, I guess.” 

“What’s it do?” 

“T hate to say it, but we’d better find out in combat; I don’t want to waste 
power. Ritch?” He looked at the thing and shook his head. 

My skin was tingling after dumping the suit. We three exchanged that 
special expression that is only shared by those who skirt close to death. We 
touched hands, more than a handshake—more like taking a secret oath. 

There was nowhere to go but back out to the courtyard, and now I was 
glad we’d already popped the two pumpkins. We found another difference 
in the pattern: a new door next to the old, this one locked. Arlene dropped to 
her knees and fiddled with it. “Bad news,” she said finally. “I can’t pick this 
one.” 

That was annoying. I’d about convinced myself that she could handle 
any of these. Surveying the scenery, I noticed a third door on the far side of 
the courtyard. This place was turning into a hotel lobby! “Let’s try over 
there,” I suggested. 

We skulked through the doorway and entered a dark corridor. I took 
point and no one argued. I suppose I’d become careless. I didn’t notice the 
teleport pad until I’d stepped on it. 

This one was quick, but it made me feel like I wanted to throw up. 
Suddenly I was standing on a triangular platform directly behind two 
pumpkins, not two meters away! 


32 


They didn’t see me. That was a good thing because there was no 
way I could kill them quickly with a shotgun or pistol. It would take 
multiple shots to destroy them, and at this range, long before that happened 
they’d fry me with their lightning balls. And I could forget about rockets, 
unless I had a “burning” desire to be a burn-ward poster boy. 

This seemed a fine time to give the big freakin’ gun—call it a BFG—a 
shot. Taking a deep breath, I raised this fine piece of Union Aerospace 
Corporation craftsmanship and pointed it at the nearest oblivious target. 
There was no obvious trigger mechanism, so I squeezed the hand grip. 
There was no kick at all. Instead, I heard a loud whine of energy. The 
pumpkins heard it also and started rotating. 

Nothing had come out of the muzzle of the weapon yet; I had just about 
decided I’d made a big freakin’ mistake when a green ball of energy 
exploded from the sealed mouth of the gun. The light was so bright it seared 
my eyes .. . the pumpkins screamed and popped like balloons, leaving 
nothing but smoking, blue and orange shreds. 

But my troubles were not over; I wasn’t back home with my feet up. 

A horde of zombies poured out of cubbyholes that were like eyes 
stretched up and down both corridors. Funny how I hadn’t noticed them 
until trouble came out. Exhaustion was taking its toll and making me lose 
my edge. 

I'd already dropped to my belly when I heard the unmistakable clatter of 
machine-gun bullets ripping over my head. Who the hell was shooting now? 
The attack came from behind. I was tired of attacks coming from behind. 

Rolling to the side, staying low, I fired off another BFG blast down the 
corridor to the left. The results were good—a large bunch of fried zombies. 
I was ready to institute a firm gun-control policy for all undead: I would 
firmly control my BFG as I fired it. 


Leaping down from the pumpkin platform, I bolted along the corridor to 
the left end, ducking into a cubbyhole myself. Old rule: when a bad guy 
comes out of a hole, he’s not there anymore. I laid down the BFG and 
unslung my trusty shotgun, then poked my nose out of the cubbyhole again. 
Seemed like a good idea at the time. 

A stream of bullets came out of nowhere and I ducked back in. And at 
last I figured out what the hell was happening: it was Arlene! She must be 
firing across the hidden teleport pad . . . and her bullets were being 
teleported to where I had first emerged. No wonder the zombies were 
confused. This was enough to confuse someone with a functional brain. 

She was doing just as good a job of mowing them down as if she’d been 
present and accounted for. Encouraged, I helped out and shot the ones who 
ran past my cubbyhole, hunting for an enemy. So specters weren’t the only 
ones who could play this game. Of course, the zombies got mad and started 
shooting each other. 

They were all dead by the time Arlene joined me. She hopped off the pad 
and I filled her in. Then we returned to the end of the corridor where I had 
hidden; I’d seen a door awaiting our attentions. 

There was no special key required to open this one; of course not... a 
hell-prince waited for us on the other side. 

It had a blue key card in its mouth; we took it after making a fair trade: 
he got a whole bunch of rockets. ’'m sure the minotaur appreciated our 
generosity. 

Returning to the mouth of the corridor, we picked up Ritch. We hadn’t 
forgotten him. Ritch never seemed to regret missing out on our repeated 
exterminations, although he acquitted himself admirably when backed into 
a corner... the perfect civilian. He’d have done well at Lexington and 
Concord, provided there wasn’t a lot of running involved. 

The three of us trucked back across the courtyard to the locked door— 
and none of us was the least surprised when the key unlocked it. 

Inside was a single, ornate teleport pad. We blinked into existence in a 
vast room, a huge, open pit with a narrow catwalk running around the 
periphery. Our eyes watered from mist in the air. The place stank of boiled 
rock and the walls were the color of dried blood, and everywhere was the 
stench of sour lemons. 


“This is it!” Ritch said, suddenly excited. “This is the place where the 
spider, the mastermind, interrogated me.” 

I'd been getting to the point of dismissing any differences in the hellish 
architecture. All the chambers seemed more and more identical. But they’d 
never tortured me, stringing me up to hang halfway between life and death. 
There was no doubting Ritch’s memory after what he’d been through. 

We heard a cacophony from below, as if a monster convention was being 
held under our noses. We dropped on our bellies, hugging the catwalk, and 
listened. 

I heard roaring, grunting, screaming, wheezing, howling, snuffling, and 
even a weird piping or whistling. Heavy thumping and thudding left no 
doubt that some of the big guys were down there. Didn’t hear a steam- 
demon, though; that was the only good news. 

“If you want to see the spidermind, now’s your chance,’ Ritch 
whispered. 

“Tsn’t it special invitation only?” Arlene asked. 

“T can’t help it,’ I whispered. “I’m a born Gatecrasher.” 

She crawled to the edge. “Pumpkins, hell-princes, those crazy flying 
skulls.” 

“Did we ever get around to naming them?” 

Arlene looked at me with a strange expression, as if I'd just missed 
something. “Gee . . . how about ‘flying skulls’? Any objections?” 

Shaking my head, I couldn’t help but notice Ritch’s expression. He 
probably thought our little name game the pinnacle of insanity. And Ritch 
had a gift for it himself: he’d called our steam-demon a “cyberdude,” and 
“spidermind” turned out to be a perfect description for the thing that chose 
that moment to make a big entrance. 

It was worse than all the rest. 

If ’'d found the steam-demon disgusting with its mixture of organic and 
mechanical, this completely alien /t scuttling across the floor down below 
completely turned my stomach. Numerous mechanical legs supported a 
dome housing a gigantic, gray, pulsing brain with a hideous, ersatz face 
formed in the center of the squishy gray matter itself, complete with “eyes” 
and “teeth.” It should have been funny, almost a cartoon—but there was 
nothing remotely humorous about the living incarnation of a nightmare. 


Its appearance was so unnerving that one could easily neglect taking 
inventory of the most important thing: its weapons. Even from this awkward 
angle it was easy to see that it came equipped with what looked like an 
ultraspeed Gatling gun, like a Vulcan cannon. There was little doubt that up 
close there’d be other unpleasant surprises. 

“Listen,” I hissed, “suppose we can take this spidermind thing. We’d 
throw a monkey wrench into the invasion plans right here and now! I could 
run along the catwalk, drop down in front of the creature and fry it with my 
new toy.” 

“Too dangerous,’ Arlene said. 

“It would get you with its machine guns before you got close enough to 
try,’ Ritch added. 

These were extremely good points, I had to admit. Rethinking the idea, I 
realized that even if I succeeded, I would be ripped to shreds by the throng 
of monsters surrounding the boss. Ritch seemed to be reading my thoughts 
when he said: “We should kill some of the other creatures so the spidermind 
won’t have as much backup.” Maybe this guy could make an honorary 
Marine after all. 

Creeping along the catwalk rim, peeking over the edge, we made slow 
progress. While finding a more advantageous position, Ritch sneezed. I 
think he was allergic to monsters. 

The element of surprise blown, it was time to open fire and blow them 
away. Their reward for paying attention. Arlene and I worked through the 
rockets we’d scavenged from the steam-demon chamber. Good distance and 
angle to use those little darlings. 

There had been so much noise already that plenty of the monsters farther 
away still hadn’t noticed what was going on. They were partying down. Our 
primary goal was to keep the spidermind from noticing as long as 
inhumanly possible, so we never shot a rocket in its direction. 

We still had a lot of unanswered questions: How well did the brain hear? 
And were other creatures supposed to report back—and were they in 
constant communication, by radio or telepathy? 

We continued the slaughter. Ritch was proving himself useful again, this 
time with his Sig-Cow. Finally, the general run of monsters noticed that 
something was amiss. 


Some became agitated and began to run about, their roars more 
thoughtful, attuned to the condition of the general community . 
communication, obviously. A few even attempted to apply what mentality 
they had to “investigate” the mysterious deaths of their comrades. 

Alas, the spidermind lived up to its name. It detected the trouble and 
began stomping around, trying to identify the source. But my respect for 
that great quantity of gray matter declined somewhat as the damned thing 
got frustrated and started blasting away at random, killing its troops! 

Ritch crept over and offered more analysis: “Corporal Taggart, I—” 

“Call me Fly.” 

“Well, Fly, P've been thinking that the amount of energy required to 
actually move Deimos through hyperspace would be monumental. There’s 
no way they could have snuck such a huge power generator onto Deimos 
through those fairly small Gates. We’re talking many terawatts, thousands 
of Hoover Dams worth of power.” 

“Makes sense,’ I said. Arlene nodded, while continuing to hold down the 
fort. 

“The most likely explanation is that the power is coming from an 
external source,” he said, “and they’re beaming it in somehow.” 

“Ritch,” Arlene said, “are you saying cut the power and end the 
invasion?” For the first time since seeing the spawning vats, I began to think 
we might really have a chance. So long as they had power, they could 
produce an endless number of monsters in their damned caldrons. 

It was time to cancel their service. 


33 


Arlene pointed at a central building, a small pillbox structure right 
in the center of the monster convention. In all the chaos, none of the 
creatures had gotten anywhere near this pillbox . . . as if they deliberately 
avoided it. 

“Could that be the power receiver?” she asked. 

Ritch shrugged. “I don’t know, but it seems like the best possibility.” 

That possibility did as much for our morale as if we’d each been given a 
blue face-sphere. The spidermind continued firing until many of the other 
creatures, its own troops, were killed or driven off. It was now or never. 

I jumped first, feeling as if I could fly. Arlene followed and I turned to 
help, but she didn’t need a hand. We both had to help Ritch, who wasn’t 
exactly constructed for flight. The three of us made a dash for the central 
building. 

Monster corpses presented a major obstacle; but we quickly turned 
grateful for the thick-limbed, heavy bodies all over the floor. The 
spidermind noticed us and opened fire with its 30mm Vulcans. We hit the 
deck and used the bodies for cover. 

The incredible creature charged us, firing maybe three hundred rounds a 
minute, five rounds a second. In a few moments it would be upon us, firing 
so rapidly we’d never be able to return fire. 

Suddenly the firing stopped. The spidermind was tangled up in the 
bodies it had helped produce. The mechanical spider legs were not designed 
for an obstacle course. 

“Run!” I shouted, heading for the building. A quick glance at the 
location of the spidermind told me what I needed to know—the angles were 
perfect. “Get between the spidermind and the building—move!” 

I bolted hutward and immediately sprawled gracefully over the prone 
body of a steam-demon—a steam-demon! My heart leapt up my throat .. . 


then I realized the damned thing was under bloody construction. Great, and 
me without my monkey wrench! 

The gigantic monster lay on its belly, face into the deck; the missiles 
were exposed, and as bullets flew haphazardly over my head I swallowed 
hard: a couple of good shots might detonate the warheads on those puppies 
—or, if the warheads weren’t yet attached, the fuel cells could rupture and 
spray us all with caustic and flammable rocket fuel. 

“Very adroit, Mr. Leslie,’ snapped Arlene, yanking me to my feet. 

We made tracks. We had crossed perhaps a third of the open territory 
when a wave of horror struck me like a physical hammer blow. 

Nightmarish images of Degas, Bosch, Patrick Woodruff . . . blood 
dripping from the walls and ceiling, sprays of blood in the distance, blood 
from overhead sprinklers . . . it probed, trying to find a weak spot: my father 
lurched out of the building, grinning and slapping his body. “Me heap big 
chief Kamehameha!” he shouted, then gave a Tarzan yell. 

He humiliated me all over again, as he had twenty years earlier; we’d 
been in Hawaii in a museum, before a life-size (huge) statue of Hawaii’s 
greatest king. I shrank away from him, praying to God no one knew he was 
my father; but he followed me, saying, “Did you see what I did? Watch!” 
And he did it again! 

I was never more ashamed of him in my life. We were lucky to make it 
out of the museum alive. But goddamn it, he was not going to stop me 
reaching that building. I pushed on, tuning out the spidermind. 

Then I saw myself brought up on charges again, but this time I was tried 
and convicted, and they ripped the stripes off my sleeve like, what was it, 
that old television show, two-dimensional . . . Branded, something like that. 
They tore off my sharpshooter’s medal, my ribbons, finally the eagle-and- 
globe that told the world I was a Marine. 

But I gritted my teeth, and through my tears I told myself that J knew I 
was a Marine no matter what, and Arlene would never let me forget it even 
if I tried. 

My feet never stopped. 

God knows what horrors it sent to Arlene and Ritch; their faces were 
white, grim, but determined. 

The monstrosity realized it didn’t have our number psychologically and 
tried the more direct route: it opened fire. But it was off balance, picking its 


way through the bodies, and the whole contraption tumbled over. This gave 
us the time to get into position. Just as we got behind the building, the 
spidermind freed itself, stood up straight on mechanical legs, swiveled the 
weaponry into position . . . and started firing. A few quick burps of gunfire 
probed our way; then it abruptly choked off and there was silence. 

“What happened?” Ritch asked. 

“Tt’s like it stopped automatically,’ Arlene said. 

“Tt can’t shoot us without shooting the building!” I realized. “The guns 
were clearly cut off by a circuit breaker.” 

We had to get inside; but the spidermind lived up to its name. The thing 
scuttled quickly to the side, trying for a better angle and a clear shot. We 
kept moving, dancing around the pillbox in a tightening spiral, always 
keeping ourselves between the spidermind and the building. It was like 
playing some kind of children’s game, only this playground was the killing 
field. 

Then we had a new problem. The other monsters had been considerate 
enough to stay away, but now the noise attracted them back into the fray. A 
random sampling of fireballs, ball lightning, and even the hell-princes’ 
green fire creased our bow. Under the circumstances, it would have been 
rude not to respond. We fired back, while we kept running from the 
spidermind. 

“One rocket left!” I yelled as I fired the penultimate one at a minotaur. I 
slung the launcher—never know when a weapon might come in handy. But 
Arlene must’ve figured there’d be no more rainy days: she blew through her 
AB-10 ammo and dropped the pistol without a second glance, not wanting 
anything to slow her down. 

Bill Ritch fired his Sig-Cow at the spinys and actually dropped one. 

Despite his bulk, he’d managed to keep up with us, although his heavy 
breathing was cause for worry. I hoped he wouldn’t have a heart attack. We 
still needed him. I wasn’t being callous in thinking this; the mission was all- 
important. 

God, did I actually think that? I guess I did. Arlene had converted me. . . 
and I didn’t even know when she managed it. My goal had shifted from 
rescuing her to fighting the last battle as the last Marine. 

I blew the door off its hinges with a point-blank shotgun blast. One of 
the spinys didn’t approve of my housebreaking; it dive-bombed me and 


flung a ball of burning mucus that just missed . . . just missed me that is. 
Arlene took it out—but then I glanced over at Ritch and saw that the imp 
had done him serious damage. 

Ritch had taken a faceful of the poison and was coughing his guts up. 
Holding the door open with my back, I racked and fired as fast as I could as 
Arlene dragged Ritch inside. 

Vindication! The room was full of electronic gear, cables, data banks. 
While Arlene did what she could for Ritch, damned little under the 
circumstances, I stood guard on all four doors, shooting anything that 
ventured close. Naturally, the monsters couldn’t fire back. I enjoyed the 
situation until one of the imps flung a spitwad and hit the door frame, 
missing me by a handsbreadth. 

For one moment in the history of the universe, the spidermind and Yours 
Truly shared the same opinion. The imp’s action was ill-considered in the 
extreme. The spidermind proved it was no dummy; it blew the imp to 
cutlets. 

I drifted from doorway to doorway and nothing shot at me; however, 
every time I passed within line-of-sight of the spidermind, I caught another 
faceful of hypnogogic horror. It was the only weapon the critter had left; in 
a way, you had to feel sorry for it. 

Well . .. maybe not. 

“How’s it going?” I asked Arlene, already knowing the answer. She 
shook her head. Ritch was in a lot worse shock than when we first found 
him. The flaming goo had stuck to his face, catching him just as he inhaled; 
his lungs were fried . . . they could no longer transport oxygen to his blood. 

I didn’t know what we were going to do; maybe a hospital could save 
him .. . but we didn’t even have bandages or painkiller. 

The skin of his face was angry red, and it was bleeding in a dozen spots 
where enough layers of epidermis had burned away. He must have been in 
agony .. . and Ritch knew it was hopeless, for him at least; he was a smart 
man. 

Bill was dying. 

Arlene propped him against a wall and whispered in his ear. He nodded, 
making the coughing worse; but she wiped his eyes, and he could see well 
enough to help us. 


In a weak voice he began identifying critical components within the 
room. He remembered everything from when they forced him to work on 
the mess. He told us what we needed to know. 

Arlene left him propped against the wall and came to me. In a low voice 
she said “I wish we had one of those blue spheres right now.” 

“Tt’s the only thing that would save him,” I agreed. 

‘“‘We don’t even have a Medikit. At least I could make him comfortable.” 

I looked her in the eye. “He told us what we need to know,’ I said. 
“That’s the important thing.” 

I felt professional. I felt several degrees colder than mean. 

But Arlene was as much a pro as I. “Do you want to perform the coup de 
grace on this energy conduit, or shall I?” 

While I thought about it, she made up my mind for me: “You’d better do 
it, Fly; we need a real sharpshooter’s eye to keep those bastards far enough 
away that they can’t reach in and grab us. I suppose even you can’t miss a 
computer bank from two meters away, hey? Even if you can’t shoot an 
apple off Goforth’s head.” She grinned. 

I turned and became a one-man wrecking crew. Raising the BFG, I took 
a deep breath and let fly at the collection of electronics. The explosion 
knocked me on my butt. I staggered up and took out the rest of the targets 
Ritch pointed out in the mass of equipment. After four walloping shots, the 
BFG fizzled and wouldn’t shoot anymore. Out of juice. I finished the job 
with a dozen shotgun shells. 

“Jesus, Fly! Come look at this,’ Arlene shouted. I came, still shaking, 
ears still ringing like Christmas. 

This was turning into an hour of surprises. The monsters were acting like 
they were on PCP, wandering in circles and firing at anything that moved— 
which meant each other. 

The spidermind still seemed to have control over its ugly faculties. It 
opened fire on several of the hell-princes, no doubt with the idea of 
removing those of its minions most potentially dangerous if there were no 
way to give them orders. 

Naturally, the executions drew the attention of other monsters. They fired 
at the noise. We weren’t cast members in that show, but we took full 
advantage of our backstage passes. 


Fifteen minutes later there was one monster, count ’em, one monster left 
that we could see. For the moment, the spidermind was boss over itself. 
And it had one other problem besides not being able to get any decent help. 
The gun cylinders spun, empty. The spider hadn’t saved any ammo for us. 

“Ritch,” Arlene said, speaking quietly but enunciating clearly, “your plan 
worked brilliantly.” 

I’m sure he would have appreciated her good opinion of him—if he had 
still been alive. 

The damned, stupid spiny had killed him after all. I stared at the dead 
face of Bill Ritch, the captivity and torture survivor, comrade, the man who 
gave us areal chance to defeat the alien invaders. I looked at this brand new 
corpse and something snapped. 

“Tm sick of this,’ I told Arlene. I shrugged off my beloved rocket 
launcher and handed it to my best gal-pal. “Keep an eye on me, First Class. 
You’ll know when to use it . . . and don’t, God damn it, miss.” 

“Show me the apple, Flynn Taggart, and I'll pop it off your head.” 

I loaded up my shotgun, for attention-grabbing purposes only, and 
calmly walked out to face the ugliest alien of them all. 

“Hey, spider baby,” I called out. “Yeah, I’m talking to you!” 

The turret turned. The spidermind and I looked at each other . . . and 
suddenly I was overwhelmed with the most horrific vision of all: I saw the 
Earth in flames, burning buildings, fields, oceans of corpses. I saw the 
demons, not just aliens, but honest-to-Lucifer demons, wading through the 
rivers of filth and blood and urine, laughing in triumph. 

I saw mankind under the heel. Collars around our throats, chains on 
wrists and ankles. I saw collaborators, traitors, quislings, turncoats of every 
race and culture. 

I saw a “Vichy” Earth government. 

And I saw in the distance an endless parade of bigger and more ghastly 
demons. They filled the land from end to end, sea to shining sea. 

And I knew this vision was no nightmare plucked from my own 
subconscious fears. This was reality. 

I saw the future. I leaned forward and spat upon the shredded machine 
mind. 

“Remember the imp you had talk to me back on Phobos? That creepy 
leatherface asked for my surrender. Well, here’s my answer, you insect!” 


Raising my shotgun, I took careful aim and blasted toward the brain 
inside the crystal case. Then I did it again. And again. And again. I stopped 
at eight shots because I’d run out of shells, and because the turret had finally 
rotated in my direction and was chewing up the deckplates with 30mm 
rounds. 

I slalomed through the heaped corpses, looking for one in particular . . . 
one body not dead but pre-born, as my nuns would say, though in a hell of a 
different context. 

I was looking for my steam-demon, and that had to be a first! 

The spidermind scuttled after me; on open ground it could make quite a 
clip . . . quite a bit faster than a mere two-legger like me. But we weren’t on 
open ground; I chose my route well. I leapt from body to body like Eliza 
across the ice floes, and the frustrated arachnoid android started shooting 
the corpses out of the way for clearer footing. 

I put some distance between us, and for a moment the stupid thing lost 
me! Great .. . I should’ve brought an air horn. Crouching so I wouldn’t get 
clopped by a stray, I loaded up, stood, and fired a few more shells. It spotted 
me, screamed in triumph—just like you’d expect an insect to sound, 
magnified a billion times—and charged, Gatling barrels spinning like 
gyroscopes. 

I ran the hundred in world-record time. I flung myself through the air in 
a graceful swan dive, tucked at the last second, and rolled beautifully— 
dislocating my shoulder. 

I struggled up, shifted the shotgun to my right, weak hand, reached over 
the steam-demon, and let fly with the last shell. 

My cough was answered by a diarrhea of Vulcan Cannon rounds that 
tore up the iron flesh of the steam-demon like an AB-10 tears up plaster. 
The bullets ripped the legs apart; they ripped the head apart. 

They ripped the missiles apart. 

I clenched my teeth .. . now was the moment of truth. If they’d already 
attached those warheads . . . Well, I guess I’d either go north and meet the 
nuns, or... or stay right where I was—in Hell! 

Fifteen seconds and 750 rounds later, sudden silence startled me back to 
the here-and-now. My ears throbbed and rang, and my skull felt like it was 
still vibrating; but the spidermind had stopped shooting to see what damage 
it had done. 


I wasn’t about to stick my head up, but I didn’t need to: I closed my eyes 
and sniffed deeply. 

There is a smell most people don’t know, but once you’ve tasted it, you 
never forget it. Anyone who’s hung around a Marine air base or Naval air 
station remembers and pilots remember from the airport: it’s the pungent 
aroma of JP-9 “jet propellant,’ and it tears through your septum, up your 
nasal passages, and straight into your brain. Think of ammonia, 
formaldehyde, and skunk-juice swirled together into a malt. 

There was no possibility of error... dozens of gallons of the burn-juice 
pooled around the steam-demon; in fact, looking down, I saw it seeping 
from under the body onto my side, eating away at my boots worse than the 
green sludge. 

My bruised eardrums were trying to tell me something urgent, a sound 
behind the ringing and throbbing: clicking feet. The spidermind was on its 
way to investigate! 

I backed slowly away, crouching lower and lower to stay behind the 
steam-demon; then the spidermind loomed, and I could no longer hide. 

It screamed again, this time in rage, not triumph, and charged. 

It slipped in the fuel slick that it itself had created. It tried to rise and 
slipped again, skating in the horrible stuff. JP-9 dripped from the 
spidermind’s underbelly, splashed up and down its legs, even sprayed across 
the crystal canopy. 

Time to split that apple, A.S.! 

I dashed to the side, waving frantically at the building; I couldn’t see 
Arlene. I pointed at the spidermind, screaming, “Now, now, you crazy 
bitch!” She couldn’t hear me, of course, or I never would have said such a 
thing! 

A tiny bud of red bloomed in the black doorway, flowering into the 
bright-red tail exhaust of our very last rocket. I hit the deck, hands over 
head, belatedly wondering whether any of the jet propellant had sprayed on 
me... 
I barely heard the explosion through the ringing, but the force kicked me 
in my dislocated shoulder. After a moment with my eyes shut, arms locked 
over my head, I ventured a glance. 

The spidermind screeched and skittered, joyously engulfed in bright 
white flames, like one of Weem’s monks protesting the war in Kefiristan by 


immolating himself with burning gasoline. 

I watched for several minutes, keeping low as the last of the spidermind’s 
ammo exploded, bursting off in all directions. Mobility lasted only half a 
minute, then the intense heat melted the crystal canopy, turning the truck- 
size brain into a crispie critter in seconds. It took longer for the metal body 
to liquefy, even longer for the whole mass to bubble through the melted 
deckplates. At last there was nothing left of the dreaded spidermind but a 
smoking crater. .. . “Get used to it,’ I muttered, unable to even hear my own 
voice. “Think of this as a rehearsal for the next eternity.” 

A hand grabbed my arm—my left arm. “No!” I screamed; then I 
screamed again in pain as Arlene yanked on my dislocated shoulder. 

“Jesus, Fly, ’'m sorry!” I faintly heard her voice, as if through a 
speakerphone across the room. 

I rolled onto my back, swearing like a drunken longshoreman. “Oh,” she 
said, “I see what it is. Hang on, Fly, this is going to hurt—but you’ll thank 
me for it in a minute.” 

Would you believe she grabbed my biceps, pulled my arm out of the 
socket, and snapped it back into place? 

I passed out. 

I came to in a few seconds, then cursed her out again, sorting the epithets 
alphabetically, in case I missed any. I passed through the scatological and 
had started on the blasphemous when she shut me up by planting a big, wet 
boot-heel on my mouth. 

She sat me up; by then, my ears were starting to recover, and I could 
hear what she said. “Pretty spectacular, Fly. I guess we won... . Ritch 
would’ve loved this spread now.” 

But still I heard the hum of power. The lights remained lit. Something 
was wrong with this picture. 

“T hope you won’t take this wrong,’ said Arlene, staring curiously 
around, “but why aren’t we plunged into terrible darkness, Fly Taggart?” 

“I know what you mean, A.S. We can’t feel total satisfaction until we’re 
freezing to death in the black night of space...” 

“And running out of air.” 

“So what’s gone wrong with Bill Ritch’s plan?” 

She frowned in thought. “I guess that building didn’t house the power 
receiver, after all,’ she said. “It must have been the communications gear by 


which the spidermind was controlling all the other creatures.” 

“You mean all the creatures left on Deimos and Phobos will destroy one 
another, like these guys did?” I smiled . . . I like that thought. 

“The spidermind was barely able to control them as it was,” she pointed 
out. “They have a natural hatred for each other.” 

I remembered the crucified hell-princes. Then I remembered Bill, dying 
from the stupid blast from a stupid imp. Now he was gone! 

Focus, Fly... focus. 

We went back in the control room and I threw a piece of canvas over 
Ritch. We laid his body out in the place that was the most appropriate crypt: 
the scene of his victory over the demons. 

“All right,” I said. “I think we should retrace our steps back to the surface 
of Deimos. Maybe we can figure out how to get back to Mars from there, or 
at least figure out where in hell we are.” 

“Watch your language,’ Arlene said seriously. Hm, Arlene Sanders— 
with religion. 

As we worked our way back up through the levels of Deimos, we found 
the dead bodies of hundreds, then thousands, of the alien monsters. It was 
as if the Cosmic Orkin company had come through and done a big special 
on demonic infestation. 

There were a very few live ones, so completely out of it that they hardly 
seemed worth killing. Somehow Arlene and I found the will to exterminate 
them anyway. 

When we reached the surface, we discovered the pressure dome was 
cracked, the air rushing out, creating a minihurricane. Of course, we had 
been adequately briefed on the basics of life in space. It would take days for 
all the air to escape; we weren’t planning to wait around that long. 

I looked past the crack—and stopped breathing. I stared so long, 
forgetting to blink, that my eyes blurred. 

I wasn’t staring at Mars anymore. Where Mars had loomed, hanging 
over our heads like a wrecking ball, was a different planet, one that looked 
disturbingly familiar: blue-green, familiar land masses, cloud cover, 
teeming with six billion cousins and uncles. 

We weren’t in a hyperspace tunnel any longer. We looked for several 
minutes, hoping it was a shared hallucination. At last Arlene said, “I guess 
we know their invasion plans now.” 


As I stared at Earth in the skies of Deimos, through a cracked and broken 
pressure dome, I felt a queer sense of dislocation, as if I were no longer 
sitting inside my own body—but standing alongside. I shook, as if I had a 
terrible fever, mindlessly clutching at my uniform—Weems’s uniform. 
“Well,” I began feebly, “at least we stopped them.” 

“Did we?” She reached out, as if trying to pet the planet. 

Beyond the domes, amid the bright-flecked black of space, other bright 
spots flared upon the continents, shining through the scattered clouds. 
Nuclear explosions would look just like that; other things, worse things, 
could look like that as well. 

“Jesus, they’ve already invaded,” Arlene said, hope draining away from 
her voice faster than the escaping air. 

I took her by the arm and said, “It’s not over, Arlene! We’ve already 
proven who’s tougher. We won’t let it end like this!” 

But we had no ship, no radio, not even a really long rope. We were stuck 
in low orbit around Earth, a mere four hundred kilometers away, hanging 
over our heads like the biggest balloon we could ever hope to play with. 

I shut my eyes tight, then opened them. How would we do the 
impossible? How could we jump four hundred kilometers to Earth and kill 
the orbital velocity? 

We didn’t say anything for a very long time. We watched the white spots 
appearing over the northern hemisphere, over the hot, blue oceans and cool, 
green hills of earth. 

Suddenly, Arlene gasped; her eyes opened wide. “Fly, I have it 

“What?” 

“T know how to do it!” 

“Do what damn it?” 

Her lips moved, silently calculating. Then she grinned. “I know how to 
get us across to Earth, Fly!” 


Doom. Hell on Earth



     For some reason, the fire monster seemed to have a. 1
     As we hit the roof of Deimos, I looked up.
The pressure dome was cracked. Of course. That
made sense, the way things had been going. Next
thing you knew, thousand-year-old Martians would
come along and wink us out of existence.
     Fly Taggart stared at the crack, and his eyes bugged
out like a frog. I wish he knew a bit more physics; if I
have one complaint about Fly, it's that he doesn't
hold with higher education. The crack was small, and
I could see it wasn't going to leak all the air out of the
dome in the next few minutes. Days, more like; days,
or even weeks. It's a big facility.
     Then I looked past the crack and saw what that
huge Marine corporal was really staring at: we weren't
orbiting Mars anymore!
     The entire moon of Deimos had just taken a
whirlwind tour of the solar system. I swallowed hard;
we were staring at Earth.
     "I ... guess we know their invasion plans now," I
said, feeling the blood rush to my face.
     Fly plucked at his uniform--Lieutenant Weems's
uniform, except he'd pulled off the butter bars--like
it had suddenly started itching, "Well at least we
stopped them," he said.
     "Look again, Fly." The globe was flecked with
bright pinpoints of light, flares of explosives millions
of times more powerful, more hellish, than any we
had ducked or lobbed back here on Deimos. I
     pointed to the obvious nuclear exchange blanketing
our home, dumping like a few billion tons of radia-
tion, fallout, and sheer explosive muscle on--on
everyone we had ever known. "Looks like they've
already invaded."
     Fly suddenly latched onto my arm with a vise grip
of raging emotion. I tried to pry his steel hands loose,
while he hollered in my ear. "It's not over, Arlene!"
PFC Arlene Sanders, United States Marine Corps:
that's me. "We've already proven who's tougher. We
won't let it end like this!"
     Right. Me and Fly and nothing but weapons,
ammo, and a hand with some fingers on it. We were,
going to jump from LEO down to the surface of the
Earth. Or maybe we'd drive the planetoid down and
land it at Point Mugu. I guess you couldn't consider
Deimos strictly a moon anymore, since it appeared to
be mobile.
     We were stuck a mere four hundred klicks from
where we wanted to be: but that was four hundred
kilometers straight up. What's more, we were flying
around the Earth at something better than ten kilom-
eters per second--not only would we have to jump
down, we'd better do one hell of a big foot-drag to kill
that orbital velocity.
     And after that we'd solve Format's Last Theorem,
simplify the tax code, and cure world hunger.
That last one was easy enough to fix. The problem
wasn't that there wasn't enough food; it was just in
the wrong places and didn't last long enough. I once
heard an old duffer say all we really needed was food
irradiation, Seal-a-Meals, and a bunch of rocket mail
tubes to plant the food in the center of the famine du
jour.
     Rocket mail tubes . . .
"Fly," I shrieked, jumping up and down. "I know
how to do it!"
     "Do what, damn it?"
Could we do it? I did some fast, rule-of-thumb
calculations: our mass versus that of a typical "care
package" from Mars, the sort they sent up to the
grunts like me serving on Deimos; the Earth's gravita-
tional pull compared to that of Mars--it's harder to
fly up and down off the Earth's surface than the
Martian surface. Maybe ... no, it would work!
Well, maybe.
     "I know how to get us across to Earth, Fly. Did you
know there's a maintenance shed for unmanned snip-
ping rockets on this dump of a moon?"
     "No," he said suspiciously.
Of course he didn't. He was never stationed here,
like I'd been. It was a garage where the motor-pool
sergeant kept all the mail tubes, the shipping rockets. I
had no idea why they were called "mail tubes"; we
send our mail electronically, as the universe intended.
"A one-way ticket to Earth," I summed up, trying
to penetrate that thick skull of his. "If we can find any
kind of ship, we go home and kick some zombie ass.
Again."
     "All over again," he breathed, catching my drift at
last. "Well, hell, we're professionals at this now!"
We continued looking at the familiar blue-green
sphere of Earth, as the unfamiliar white spots ap-
peared and disappeared all over the globe. An old
piece of advice floated up from deep in my memory:
DON'T LOOK DOWN! We gazed upon white clouds
     so beautiful that they reminded me of what we'd been
fighting to save.
     Were we too late? Part of me hoped so, a part that
just wanted to sit down and rest.
     We'd fought those damned, ugly monsters until we
were too tired to fight--and now it was looking like
we had to do it all over again.
     All at once I noticed a sprinkling of the flares all
over California, my home state. "Oh, God, Fly," I
said, my stomach contracting.
     "Yeah. Terrible." Jesus, couldn't my best bud think
of anything stronger to say when Armageddon came
to your hometown?
     I shook my head. "You don't understand. That's
not what I meant. I mean I don't feel anything." I
trembled as I spoke.
     Fly put his arm around me; well, that was more like
it. "It's all right," he mumbled. "It's not what you
think. There's nothing wrong with you. After what
you've been through, you're just numb. Your brain is
tired."
     I let my head rest on his shoulder. "So my mind is
coming loose. What about body and soul?"
     Right then and there I decided we needed a new
word to describe the state after you've reached ex-
haustion but had to keep going on automatic pilot.
Wherever that state was, Fly and I had been there a
long, long time.
     2
I put my arm around Arlene's shoulders,
     hoping she would understand it meant nothing but
friendship. Oh don't be silly, Fly; of course she
understands!
     Where to begin? I was born at an early age, in a log
cabin I helped my father build. I grew up, joined
the UnitedStatesMarineCorpsSir!--went to fight
"Scythe of Glory" Communist leftovers in Ke-
firistan, punched out the C.O., was banged up in the
brig and sent to Mars with the rest of my jarhead
buddies.
     We up-shipped to Phobos, one of the moons of
Mars--well, now the only moon of Mars--and dis-
covered a boatload of aliens had invaded through the
used-to-be-dormant "Gates," long-range teleporters
from . . . from where? From another planet, God
knows where. Arlene and I battled our way into the
depths of the Phobos facility of the Union Aerospace
Corporation . . . who started the whole invasion,
turns out, by monkeying with the Gates in the first
place.
     It all rolled downhill from there. We ended up on
Deimos somehow--and I'm still not sure how that
happened!--and duked our way up one side and
down the other, killing more types of monsters than
you can shake a twelve-gauge at, finally ending up in a
hyperspace tunnel . . . you'll have to ask Arlene Sand-
ers (Exhibit A, the gal to my left) to explain what that
is. But when we finally killed everything worth killing,
we lucked into stopping the invasion cold. See previ-
ous report-from-the-front for full details.
     In the end, we faced down the spidermind--the
handy nickname chosen for the spider-shaped "mas-
termind" of the invasion, chosen by Bill Ritch,
requisat in pace, a computer genius who helped us at
the cost of his own life.
     Right before defeating the spidermind, I'd thought
there was nothing left in me. I was certain that I
couldn't have continued without Arlene, a physical
reminder of what we were fighting for, like old-time
war propaganda. While she breathed, I had to
breathe, and fight. Blame it on the genes. We'd had
the strength to go on against hundreds of monsters.
We weren't about to let a little thing like the laws of
physics stop us now.
     Arlene couldn't stop looking at California, so I
gently led her away from the sight. "You know,
Arlene, I feel really stupid that I didn't think of the
shed; especially after using the rocket fuel to fry the
friggin' spider."
     She blinked her eyes and rubbed them. I could tell
she was trying not to cry. "That's why you need me,
Flynn Peter Taggart."
     So we went spaceship shopping.
Of course, there was the little matter of adding to
our personal armaments. We hadn't seen any mon-
sters for a while. Maybe we neutralized all of them--
but I wasn't about to count on it.
     "Once, I was asked why I don't like to go out on the
street without being armed," I told Arlene.
     "Must have been an idiot," came the terse reply.
She'd regained her self-control, but she was still acting
defensive. We were good friends, but that made it
easier for her to be embarrassed in front of me.
"No, I wouldn't call her that," I continued. "But
she'd lived a protected life; never came up against the
mother of all storms."
     "What's that?" Arlene wanted to know.
"Late-twentieth-century street slang for when the
bad mother on your block decides it's time to teach
you a lesson. At such times, it is advisable to carry an
equalizer."
     "Like this?" Arlene asked, bending down to re-
trieve an AB-10 machine pistol, her personal fave.
Every little bit helps.
     "If my friend had one of those in her purse--" I
began, but Arlene interrupted.
     "Too long to get it out. I like to carry on my
person."
     "Yeah, yeah. I was about to say if she had carried,
she might be alive today."
     Arlene stopped rummaging through the contents of
a UAC crate and looked up. "Oh, Fly, I'm sorry."
"Sometimes you get the lesson only one time, and
it's pass-fail." I playfully poked the air in her direc-
tion. "Welcome back," I said.
     "What do you mean?" she asked, squinting at me
the way she always did when I made her defensive.
"You can feel again, dear."
     "Oh," she said, her body becoming more relaxed.
"You're right. One person means something. Well,
sometimes . . . if there aren't too many one persons."
"One's real. There's the body on the floor. A
million is just a statistic, no matter how much
screaming the professional mourner does."
     She punched the air back at me. And she smiled.
We didn't talk for a little while. We continued gather-
ing goodies en route to the shed. It didn't take long to
locate; the good news was that it was large and
apparently well-stocked. It would take days to go
through all the crates and boxes; but if the labels on
the outside were accurate, we'd discovered a much
larger inventory of parts than I would have imagined
necessary for Deimos Base.
     The bad news was a complete absence of ships in
any state of assembly. There was nothing to fly!
"Well jeez, I thought it was a great idea," said
Arlene. "Too bad it flopped."
     Somehow it seemed immoral to give up hope while
standing inside Santa's workshop. I began examining
some of the boxes while Arlene kicked one across the
room; but that didn't bother me, she was never meant
for the modern age she was born into. She'd have been
more homey as a freebooter in the days of blood and
iron, when one physically competent woman did
enough in her lifetime to breed legends of lost,
Amazonian races of warrior queens. She had guts; she
had cold steel will. She didn't have patience, but what
the hell!
     I didn't think I would face death as well as she. I'd
go down in a very nonstoic way, kicking death in the
groin if I could only line up my shot.
     I looked inside those boxes--big ones, little ones,
all kinds of in-between ones--and an idea grew in my
head, a few words slipping out.
     "I wonder if it still might be possible to seize the
objective," I muttered.
     Arlene heard, too. "Huh? What do you mean, seize
the objective?"
     I was only half listening. The little voice in the back
of my head drowned her out with some really crazy
stuff: "It seems ridiculous, A.S., but it could work."
3
     The stoic qualities of Arlene Sanders were
better suited to facing death than being irritated by
her old buddy. "Fly, what the hell are you talking
about?" She stomped to where I was going through a
box of thin metal cylinders, perfect for the project
growing inside my head.
     "Yes," I said, "it really could work."
Using the special tone of voice normally reserved
for dealing with mentally deficient children and
drunken sailors, she said: "Tell me what in God's
name you're on about, Fly!"
     I lifted my head from the box. "When I was a kid, I
wanted a car real bad. I mean real bad. Real real, bad
bad."
     "Here we go down memory lane," she said with a
shrug.
     "See, I couldn't afford the car," I said, "but I
wanted one."
     "Real real, bad bad?"
"I mean, I'd have taken anything with wheels and a
transmission. If I couldn't have a six, I'd settle for
four. Three, anything! But no matter how much I
lowered expectations, I still couldn't afford a vehicle."
"Is this going somewhere, Fly, or do I need to
hitchhike back home to Mother?"
     "That's exactly right," I said. "I'm talking about
transportation. I couldn't afford a car--but I could
afford a spare part now and then, and you know how
this ended up?"
     She put her hands on her hips, head tilted to the
side, and said: "Let me guess! You collected spare
parts, and collected and collected, and finally you
were able to build your own F-20! Or was it an aircraft
carrier? Amphibious landing craft?"
     I ignored her. "I built myself a car. Had a few
problems; no brakes exactly, but it ran; and what a
powerful sound that baby made when she turned
over."
     Arlene finally saw where I was headed. Memory
lane dead-ended right here on Deimos. "Fly, you're
BS-ing me."
     "No, I really built an auto . . ."
"You are insane if you think you can build a
freakin' spaceship out of spare parts!"
     I literally jumped up and down. "You thought of it
too," I said. "Great idea, isn't it? We can build a
rocket and get off this rock."
     She was very tolerant. "Fly, an automobile is one
thing. You're talking about a spaceship."
     I looked her straight in the eye. "After all we've
been through, you going to tell me we can't do this?"
She looked me straight back. "Read my lips," she
said. "We can not do this."
     "We have nothing to lose, A.S. It can't be any
harder than taking down the spidermind, can it?"
"You have a point there," she said grudgingly. "So
how do you propose we start?"
     She was always annoyed when I used reality to win
an argument. I knew it was possible. But not without
a manual.
     "We need some tech," I said.
"Tech?"
     "Plans . . . then we can give it to our design depart-
ment."
     "Don't tell me ... I'm the design department."
I smiled. "You're the design department."
     "And what are you, Fly Taggart?"
"Everything else."
     We went looking for a manual. Ten minutes later we
found one in the most logical place, which was the last
place we looked, naturally: next to the coffee maker. I
tried to get Arlene to make us a pot of coffee, but she
stared at me as if I'd grown a third head.
     So I made it myself; I'd forgotten that Arlene didn't
indulge, but that was all right with me. I figured since
I was the production line, I needed all the caffeine I
could survive.
     Next we inventoried everything we had to work
with. Our best choice was to make a small mail rocket
intended for one person, but capable of seating two, if
they were really chummy. I wrote a list of parts
needed and found almost everything within three
hours . . . except for a thingamabob. I knew what it
was really called, but I couldn't think of it. We spent
another hour searching, and though we didn't come
across it, we located more tools that would be of
immeasurable value; a screwdriver, a drill bit, a
magnifying glass, and a paper punch.
     "Enough for now," said Arlene. "I'm sure the
thingamabob will show up before we finish. We'd
better get started ... I have no idea how fast the air is
leaking from the dome; we might have a month, we
might have a couple of days!"
     I wasn't going to argue with an optimistic Arlene.
Hell, I hardly ever argued with the pessimistic one.
"We haven't looked under all the tarps," I said, "and
there are other rooms to check too. But there is one
more shopping expedition required before we start
work. We need enough food and water to hold us
through the job; and all the spare liquid oxygen tanks
and hydrogen tanks we can find."
     Arlene nodded. We were in a race with a bunch of
air molecules, and they had a head start. In addition
to oxygen for fuel, we actually needed to breathe now
and again over the next few days. Weeks, whatever. It
would be cruel fate indeed if I screwed the last bolt
and hammered the final wing nut, only to keel over
from oxygen deprivation.
     My brain was working overtime now: "The pres-
sure is dropping so slowly, we're not going to notice
when it gets dangerous. Can you rig up something to
warn us when to start taking a hit of pure oxygen?"
"And regulate how much we should take. Yeah, it's
a space station ... I don't think I'll have much trou-
ble finding an air-pressure sensor and rebreather kit."
She pulled a gouge pad out of her shirt pocket and
started taking notes. She thought of something I'd
missed: "I'll look for warm clothes too, Fly. The
temperature will drop as we lose pressure."
     "Won't the sun warm us? We're no farther away
than Earth itself."
     "We're underground. All this dirt makes a great
insulator, unfortunately."
     First day, we were good scouts, gathering supplies
for our merit badge in survival. I regretted that we
couldn't move what we needed to a lower level and
seal off one compartment. That would stretch survival
by another month. But hauling the tons of material
we'd need to build a rocket was impossible.
     Arlene scrounged a generous supply of food, most
of it produced under the dome with considerable help
from the Genetics Department. After watching the
monsters produced assembly-line out of the vat, I
hesitated even to eat our own--human experiments
in recombinant-DNA veggies and lab-grown "Meet."
But Arlene wasn't queasy. She preferred the Deimos-
grown peas and carrots to the real delicacy, frozen
asparagus from Earth.
     "I despise asparagus," she insisted.
"All right; so I hate okra." The slimy stuff was one
of my childhood loathings.
     On the second day, we ran head-on into our first
lesson in Spaceship Construction 101: namely, trans-
lating the manual from "techie-talk" into English.
Here, what should we make of this?
     The ZDS protocol provides reliable, flow-
controlled, two-way transmission of unenriched
fuel-cell packet deliverables from nozzle to sock-
et. It is a plasma stream (PLASM-STREAM) or
     packet stream (SOCK-SEQFUELPACKET) pro-
tocol. ZDS uses the Union Aerospace Corpora-
tion double-sequencing directed stream format.
This format provides for nozzle, spray, and
     extern-spray (socket) specification.
NOTE: see the definition for ZDS-redirect in
Section 38.12.
     ACTIVE OR PASSIVE
Sockets utilizing the ZDS protocol are either
"active" or "passive." Nozzle processes must be
directed into passive (external spray) sockets.
They detect for connection requests from deliver-
able processes residing on the same or other
nodes of the fuel-cell packet path. Socket proc-
esses broadcast requests for active (directed
spray) nozzles. They sidestep nominal delivery in
favor of reverse-directed (acknowledging) packet
streams.
     ALL CONNECTIONS BETWEEN NOZZLES
AND SOCKETS MUST BE SET TO DEFAULT
     ACTIVE OR PASSIVE PROTOCOL DEPEND-
ING ON THE ANTICIPATED FUEL-CELL
     PATH DELIVERY PROCESS.
WARNING! Failure to follow UAC active/passive
nozzle-socket connection protocols may result in
unanticipated fuel-cell path combustion with un-
desirable results.
     I could translate the final warning pretty well: if we
didn't figure out what the hell they meant by
"active/passive nozzle-socket connection protocols,"
Arlene and I would become a rather spectacular
fireworks display.
     Arlene was better at figuring it out than I was; she
had actually taken engineering night courses during
her shore tours. I volunteered the use of my hands
and a strong back if she'd turn the technical gobbledy-
gook into the kind of instructions a Marine can
follow: "Put this part here! Tighten that bolt, Ma-
rine!"
     "Yeah, just like you to have the woman do all the
hard work," she said.
     "Just remind me to clean the carburetor before I
work on the piston valves."
     "It's not a car, you moron!"
"Huh. I guess in space no one can hear you make
metaphors." Amazingly, she didn't shoot me.
     Unfortunately, the rockets used by the Deimos
facility--hence all the spare parts--were short-hop,
lightweight supply rockets, never intended to carry a
single human being, let alone two of us ... and never
intended to fight a gravity well like Earth's.
There were a couple large-bore rocket casings left
over from God knows when, back before we had the
MDM-44 plasma motors developed by Union Aero-
space, and this was the key: I figured I could hot-rod a
44 into & bigger cousin, cram it inside one of the old
casings, and have enough juice to fling us off Deimos,
burn into the atmosphere, and brake to a (messy)
landing Somewhere on Earth.
     My main goal was to keep from blowing us up.
After frying our spider baby in JP-9 jet fuel, I had a
new respect for the stuff. It beat the hell out of salad
oil.
     Arlene squatted on an uncomfortable stool translat-
ing technical paragraphs into something I could un-
derstand. My optimist projection was to finish the
task in ten days!
     Reality dragged ass.
Starting our third week, we ran into the first serious
problem. Trying to jerry-rig parts we couldn't find
into configurations we couldn't figure out was a bitch,
and I insisted we needed to test-fire the motor when I
finally got a working model. We didn't have much
time, but the motor was life and death, a must test.
We'd spent two days painfully assembling it, and I do
mean "we." Arlene enjoyed an excuse to get off her
stool; besides, it was a two-man job.
     We finally ended up with a sleek beauty two meters
long and a meter in diameter, almost small enough to
fit inside the old-model rocket skin. Just a few odd
pieces here and there where I thought I could super-
charge the system--or where I couldn't find the
correct part and had to Substitute butter for eggs. A
pair of start cables snaked into the machine from ten
feet away, where a switch box was connected to
twenty-seven fifty-volt ni-cad batteries.
     I'd spent half a day welding steel bars together into
a framework, sort of, kind of approximating the
interior scaffolding in the mail tube. We bolted the
motor inside, mooring it securely to the deck plates.
Last, I attached a highly sensitive pressure sensor to
the forward edge to measure the thrust. I'd trust
Arlene to make the calculations and tell me whether
we would make it into orbit or not.
     "Want to say a prayer?" she asked before I switched
it on.
     "Yeah; I wasn't always in trouble with the nuns.
Maybe I can collect on a few good deeds." Arlene
stationed herself behind a bulkhead; I reached over
and flipped the switch, then dived behind cover.
Superheated gases rushed out the back with a
tremendous roar . . . and I could tell immediately it
was too much force; I'd tweaked my rocket engine too
good.
     But I couldn't switch it off! It was just a model,
designed to burn until the fuel was gone; no cut-off
valve.
     The scaffolding strained, groaning like a dying
steam demon--whoops, remind me later--and I
     knew what was about to happen. "Get your head
down!" I screamed. No use--she couldn't hear any-
thing over the roar of the engine and the scream of
steel twisting and ripping free.
     The mooring tore loose with a horrible, grinding
noise that for an instant even drowned out the 44. My
beautiful, working rocket engine broke free, ate the
pressure sensor with one gulp, and smashed through a
dozen boxes of precious parts before making a smok-
ing hole against the nearby bulkhead, leaving a per-
fectly straight series of holes, like a cartoon.
4
     Destroying a bulkhead on a doomed base, or
even some spare parts, was no cause for alarm.
Destroying the motor was something else again.
Arlene screamed something obscene, but I couldn't
hear her over the ringing in my ears. We got off lucky.
It could have struck the JP-9 and ended everything.
After we extinguished the fire and salvaged what we
could of the motor, Arlene looked at me humorlessly.
"Flynn Taggart, what deviltry did you do to those
poor nuns?"
     "Can you rephrase that, after what we've been
through?" We were both a little punchy, getting by on
shifts of four hours sleep. But no spiderminds were
trying to kill us, no imps throwing a wrench in the
machinery, no hell-princes setting fires worse than the
one we'd just put out. It felt like we were on vacation.
All right, to fill in a bit: an imp is what we dubbed
the brown, spiny, leathery alien that throws flaming
balls of mucus. Hell-princes looked like the typical
"devil" from my troubled youth in Catholic school--
red body, goat legs, horns, and they too threw some-
thing noxious that killed you real dead; we pretty
much decided it had to be an example of genetic
engineering, since it was too close to a human concep-
tion of evil.
     We had also killed demons, which I privately called
pinkies, that were huge, pink, hairy critters with no
brains but an awful lot of teeth; flying, metallic skulls
with little rocket motors; invisible ghosts; and an
unbelievable horde of zombies--spiritually, they
were the worst, for oftener than not, they were our
own buddies and comrades at arms, "reworked" into
the living dead.
     But the granddaddy monster of them all was the
steam-demon, so called because it was a five-meter-
tall mechanical monstrosity with a back rack full of
rockets and a launcher where its hand should have
been. When it moved, it sounded like a steam loco-
motive and shook the ground.
     None of that was important compared to one fact:
Arlene had completely changed her mind about build-
ing the rocket. "I'm sorry I ever doubted you," she
said. "I guess it is possible."
     But now I was the contrarian. "We did all the
calculations right, A.S. We checked and triple-
checked everything . . . How could the engine be so
much more powerful than we thought?"
     She smiled. "Because they obviously deliberately
understated the capabilities in the technical
literature--probably for security reasons."
     "So all our calculations are worthless crap. How are
you going to fly this thing?"
     She didn't seem overly concerned. "Fly, the vehicle
hasn't been built that I can't pilot."
     "Um . . . well, this rocket hasn't been built, has it?"
"You know what I mean! If you build it, I will fly. I
swear."
     "Hm." I didn't know what to say. I had no idea
whether she was or wasn't a hot-shot rocket pilot. We
don't get much call for that in the Light Drop Infan-
try. But now that she believed in the rocket, nothing
was going to stop us.
     There were other motor parts, and we patched
together something I figured was eighty percent ready.
There was no time for better. The air was growing
thinner and the temperature was dropping ... the
crack in the dome was finally taking its toll.
The pressure dropped so gradually, we didn't even
notice. After a while I found myself panting for air
after climbing a ladder, and Arlene had to rest after
every heavy part she handed me.
     Then a couple of days later, I realized my mind was '
wandering in the middle of a task. I focused, then
wandered again.
     Arlene was able to maintain her concentration;
maybe being smaller, she didn't need as high a partial
pressure of oxygen. But both of us were getting mighty
cold.
     When I saw Arlene shivering while working, I made
her throw on a couple of sweaters and did the same.
We wore gloves, except that I kept removing mine
because it interfered with the work. Then my hands
would turn to ice, and I'd put them back on to warm
up before taking another stab at attaching the fine
filaments that ran microvolts to the plasma globules.
Suddenly, the air-pressure sensor started screaming
its fool head off. Arlene and I exchanged a worried
glance, but we didn't need to be told twice. It was time
to start hitting the raw stuff, O2 neat. We took hits off
the same oxygen bottle, trying to limit ourselves to a
few breaths every hour or so, or when we started to get
dizzy or goofy.
     But we just didn't have that much bottled oxygen.
Uncle Sugar packed a lot of air into a single bottle; but
even so, even at the slow pace we used it, we'd run out
of breathing oxygen in just a few more days. We had
more bottles, but we needed them for fuel mixing.
And of course we'd need to breathe more frequently
as the pressure dropped--paradoxically, it was drop-
ping slower now, since there was less pressure in the
dome to push the air out.
     We stretched the bottles as long as we could, but
they ran out while there was still plenty of work left.
I'd done mountain climbing in my native Colorado
before joining the Corps; as the air grew thinner, I
tried to help Arlene deal with it. "Breathe shallowly,"
I said. "Rest, and don't talk except for the job."
The physical exertion wasn't any less, though. We'd
have to stop frequently, gasping and panting. We tired
easily and needed more sleep, but stayed on the four-
hour rotations, creating a cycle of exhaustion we
couldn't break. But sleeping longer would just make
the job take longer, and the pressure would drop lower
in the meantime.
     Low pressure is insidious. There are obvious ef-
fects: exhaustion, trouble breathing, and cold. But
there are other symptoms people don't often think
about: your ears ring; it's hard to hear sounds (thinner
air makes everything sound muffled and "tinny"); and
worst of all, your mind can start to go. Our brains are
built for a certain barometric pressure, and if it's too
high or too low, we start getting strange.
     Or in Arlene's case, hallucinogenic.
"Pumpkin!" she suddenly screamed, waking me
     after two hours of my allotted four. She grabbed a
pump-action riot gun and pounded a shot over my
head, so close it made my skull vibrate.
     "Pumpkin" was our name for the horrible, floating
alien heads--mechanical, I think--that vomited ball
lightning capable of frying you at fifty paces. I threw
myself off the table we used as a bed, figuring the
vacation was over: the aliens had found us at last!
But when I dropped to my knees, Sig-Cow rifle at
the ready, all I saw was the dark hole in the wall left by
my overly enthusiastic motor test of a week ago.
Arlene ran down the passageway ahead of me, firing
wildly; firing at nothing. But those bastard alien
"demons" could be fast! I had no reason to doubt my
buddy as I joined her, ready to do what we'd done
countless times during our assault on Phobos,
Deimos, and the tunnel.
     Then she ran straight into the bulkhead like it
wasn't there, and I suddenly realized something was
seriously wrong with her.
     She knocked herself out. I couldn't look after her
then; I had to make sure about the pumpkin.
     Knuckling the residue of sleep from bloodshot eyes,
I ran like a mother down the corridor, eyes left, right
. . . not wasting a shot but ready for the enemy. For an
instant I thought I saw a flying globe and almost
squeezed off a shot. But it was a trick of peripheral
vision, just a flash of my own shadow.
     A cul-de-sac at the end of the corridor finally
convinced me that there was no freaking pumpkin.
I stood for a moment, desperately trying to get
nonexistent air into my burning lungs. Then I re-
turned to Arlene, who groaned and panted as she
started coming to.
     "Pal, honey, I hate to do this . . . but I've got to
relieve you of your weapon."
     She stared uncomprehendingly.
"There was no pumpkin," I explained. "You're
suffering from low-pressure psychosis."
     "Oh Jesus," she said quietly. She understood.
Sadly, she handed over the scattergun and her AB-10
machine pistol.
     I felt like the bottom of my boots after walking
through the green sludge. You don't relieve a Marine
of his weapon, not ever. By doing so, I'd just effec-
tively demoted her to civilian. And the worst part
was, even she realized now that she'd been halluci-
nating.
     She was crying when we walked slowly back to the
vehicle assembly room, a.k.a. the hangar. I'd never
seen Arlene cry before--except when she had to kill
the reworked, reanimated body of her former lover,
Dodd.
     "Hey," I said a few hours later, "can't we electro-
lyze water and get oxygen?"
     Arlene was silent for a moment, her lips moving.
"Yes," she said, "but we'd only get a few breaths per
liter, and we need the water too, Fly."
     "Oh." Not for the first time, I wished I knew more
engineering. I vowed to take classes when we made it
back home ... if there even was a "back home"
anymore.
     I started having unpleasant dreams, so I didn't
mind giving up more of my sleep allotment. It was
always the same dream, actually. I loved roller coast-
ers as a kid. They were the closest I could get to flying
in those days. I lived only five miles away from a
freestanding wood-frame monster. I thought I would
love nothing better, until they built a tubular steel,
eight-loop supercoaster.
     I'd never been afraid on the old roller coaster. With
all the courage of an experienced ten-year-old, I'd sit
in the car as it slowly reached the top, the horizon
slanting off to my left, and pretend it was the rim of a
planet and I was an astronaut. As it went over the top,
plunging down a cliff of wood and metal, I made it a
point of honor not to hold on to the crash bar. I was
too grown-up for that!
     I was always interested in how things were put
together and how they worked. So I asked about the
new roller coaster. A man who worked at the amuse-
ment park told me stuff he wasn't supposed to say,
stuff he knew nothing about--about how the forces
generated could snap a human neck like rotten cord-
wood, how the auxiliary chain that gave the car
acceleration had a lot of extra strain on it for an eight-
loop ride.
     As I started up the first hill of the new ride, I
thought about what I'd learned. I didn't know it was
all bogus crap made up to impress a ten-year-old.
The first loop, I worried about centrifugal force
snapping my neck; the second loop, I sweated over
velocity tearing me out of my seat; the third loop, I
fixated on the damned chain coming loose; and the
fourth loop was reserved for a ten-year-old having
ulcers over the gears stripping. And then I threw up--
not a good thing to do when you're upside down.
I wonder if that bastard ever knew what damage his
misinformation caused?
     As I grew up, I learned how real knowledge could
banish fear. You play the odds. You focus on the job at
hand. You don't want to mess up. The childhood
trauma was behind me ... until it came back now on
Deimos as I tried to grab a little sleep. Instead of rest,
I was back on that eight-loop metal monster, and now
it turned into the arms and legs of a steam-demon.
When the creature screamed at me and raised its
missile arm, I would always wake up; so I didn't even
have the pleasure of fighting or dying.
     I didn't worry about my stupid dreams, though. It
sure beat fighting the real thing. Besides, I was getting
off easy compared to Arlene.
     I knew things were bad when I tried to wake her up
and she stared with unblinking eyes, not seeing a
damned thing. I realized she was still asleep. I'd read
somewhere that it's risky to wake a person from a
trance state, and I didn't require medical training to
know Arlene was Somnambulist City.
     There wasn't time to go hunting for a medical
library. A quick check of medical supplies produced a
Law Book, wedged between the surgical bandages and
antibiotics. I had to laugh. A text on medical malprac-
tice had made it all the way to a Martian moon, and
now, by way of a hyperspace tunnel, had almost
returned to Earth.
     I wasn't laughing as I returned to Arlene. She
walked in her sleep, striking at the air in front of her.
"Get away," she said to phantoms only she could see.
"I won't leave you. I'll stay, I'll stay!"
     5
If I shouldn't wake her, there seemed no
     reason I shouldn't try to communicate. "Arlene, can
you hear me?"
     "Quiet," she said, "I don't want Fly to hear you.
He's depending on me."
     "Why don't you want him to know about me?" I
asked.
     "Because you're evil," she said with conviction.
"You're all evil, you bastards."
     She walked slowly down the corridor. So long as she
wasn't in danger of hurting herself, I saw no reason to
shock her out of it. "Why are we bad?"
     "You scare me. You make my brother do bad
things!"
     Up to that point I did not know that Arlene even
had a brother.
     It was weird--I thought we'd known everything
about each other's family life. She talked about her
parents and growing up in Los Angeles all the time. I
was uncomfortable pursuing the matter, but I rationa-
lized away my moral qualms and decided to play out
the hand. "Who are we?" I asked again.
     She swayed drunkenly, delivering a monologue like
those weird, old plays from previous centuries. "Bad
things in the air, in the night, making my brother
crazy. He'd never do bad things except for you. I
thought I'd never see you again . . . Why'd you follow
me into space, to Mars, to Deimos? When I grew up, I
thought you weren't real, but now I know better. You
followed me, but I won't let you get inside me; not
inside!"
     When Arlene had kidded me about going down
memory lane, I took it in good humor. But if we were
going to have to relive all the bad stuff from our
childhood as the air leaked away, I was good and
ready to say good-bye to Deimos now, rocket or no
rocket, instead of later.
     In the meantime, what was I going to do about
Arlene? I couldn't let her wander the corridors, argu-
ing with ghosts from her childhood. With time short
and no way to send to Earth for a correspondence
course in psychology, I went with common sense.
"Arlene, we'll make a deal with you," I said. "We'll
stop bothering you and let you get back to Fly."
"In exchange for what?" she wanted to know, quite
reasonably.
     "Because we've moved back to Earth, and you can't
touch us there."
     "Fly and I are building a ship to take us to Earth,"
"Ha, we don't believe you two will get anywhere
near us. You'll be stuck on Deimos forever!"
"That's a lie!" she snapped, and stopped walking.
"We'll fight you again." She stared right at me. "We're
not afraid of your little genetic stupidmen."
"Big words!" I said.
     She came right at me, fists raised, and started
hitting me. As I fended off her blows--not too
difficult, considering the difference in reach--I
yelled, "Hang on, Arlene, I'm coming to help you.
This is Fly, Fly!"
     As I say, I never took any courses in psychology, but
I acted in school plays. And to steal a phrase, it
doesn't take a rocket scientist to go with the flow. I
gave myself a magna cum laude graduation as her eyes
came into focus and she recognized me.
     "Fly? What happened?"
"We've been fighting monsters again."
     She looked around the empty corridor and then
back to me. I didn't have to spell it out. "How much
longer can we take this?"
     "Not a second longer than we have to."
Arlene started seeing weird colors after that--
auras, shadows, and things she wouldn't tell at first.
Sometimes she would put the tech documents down,
sitting quietly with her eyes shut until the colors went
away.
     It scared me plenty, but it terrified her. She was
losing her mind--and she knew it. So when I told her
the engine was eighty percent finished, Arlene urged,
"Fly, forget the other twenty percent. It's done! Let's
blow this popcorn stand."
     I had to be honest. "A.S., there are still a few
systems I don't think are in really good shape."
"We can't wait. We've taken chances with worse
odds than that the whole time we've been on this
rock. Fly, I ... I stopped being able to see color
vision this morning. All I can see is gray--except
when I hallucinate a rainbow-colored aura. And my
peripheral vision is shot." She paused, licking her
lips. "And Fly, there's something else."
     She came close and spoke softly, seriously. "I want
to confess something to you, Fly. What would your
nuns think of that? For the first time I'm really afraid.
I'm afraid I might kill you, thinking you're one of the
monsters. I couldn't stand that."
     The little voice in the back of my head had whis-
pered that possibility when she first imagined the
pumpkin. It was a chance I was willing to take. Even
so, I was glad she, not I, stated the danger loud and
clear.
     I sped up preparations, insisting that Arlene sleep
whenever possible. The air and pressure problems
were getting to me as well, but I handled them better
than Arlene.
     Of course, the problem with oxygen starvation is
that you are not the best judge of your own reason.
But the best chance for both of us was to finish the
rocket.
     And we were close, tantalizingly close.
I suddenly got the creepy crawlies. I recognized the
symptom: I was picking up the same psychosis as
Arlene. "All right," I acquiesced, "we go in the next
few hours. We have a chance, I guess; eighty percent is
eighty points better than zero."
     We got busy. We drank water. We ate a last good
meal of biscuits, cheese, fruit, nuts. The Eskimos say
that food is sleep, by which I guess they mean if your
body can't get one kind of recharge, you might as well
take the other.
     Arlene abandoned me to work out the telemetry
program that would (God willing) launch us, kill
Deimos's orbital velocity, dropping us into the atmos-
phere, then take us down, at which point she'd hand
over control to me to find a suitable spot to touch
down. Fortunately, it was basically cut-and-paste; I
doubt she could have written it from scratch . . . not
in the condition she was in. The hand of God must
have graced her, though she'd never admit it, for her
to keep it together long enough to patch it together.
As we prepared to leave, I kept running the basic
worries through my mind. The mail tubes were de-
signed for Mars, which has only a fraction the atmos-
phere of Earth and a much lower gravity; the specific
impulse developed by the rockets might not be
enough to overcome Earth's gravity as we spilled
velocity and tried to land. On the other hand, the
thick atmosphere might cause so much friction that
our little ship would burn up.
     The launcher was a superconducting rail gun. Re-
minded me of the eight-loop wonder at the amuse-
ment park back in the Midwest. This time I hoped I
wouldn't throw up. At least this piece of equipment
didn't have an auxiliary chain ... so what was there
to worry about?
     I grunted the launcher around to point opposite
Deimos's orbital path. The rocket controls were sim-
ple to operate, thank God; throttle, stick, various
navigational gear that I didn't really understand, and
environmental controls, all ranged around my face in
a tremendously uncomfortable position.
     Then suddenly, a few hours before our scheduled
departure, Arlene totally freaked out.
     At first I thought she was joking. She strolled up to
me and said, "Don't try to fool me; I know what you
really are."
     "Yeah, a prize SOB," I said distractedly. A moment
later I was on my butt with Arlene's boot on my chest
and a shiv--a sharpened piece of metal--against my
throat. Looking into her eyes, I saw the blank look of a
zombie . . . and for a moment, Jesus, I thought they'd
somehow gotten her, reworked her!
     But it was just the low pressure, or maybe slow
oxygen deprivation. I talked to her for five minutes
from my supine position, saying anything, God knows
what, anything to snap her back to some semblance of
herself. After a while she dropped the shiv and started
crying, saying she had murdered God or some such
silly nonsense.
     I wasn't going to abandon her, no matter what; but
there was nothing in my personal rule book that said I
had to make it any more difficult. We had Medikits in
the shed. I gave her a shot. She struggled, coughed,
and turned to me. "Why can't we eat our brothers?"
she asked; then the drug took effect.
     She'd be okay; in the mail-tube rocket, we've have
more pressure, and more important, more partial-
pressure of O2. She'd be all right ... I hoped.
I put her aboard the rocket, threw in a bag of
supplies, and squeezed in next to her. It was like being
in a sleeping bag together--or a coffin. I positioned
myself so I could reach all the controls, took a deep
breath and got serious.
     Just before lighting the cigar, I remembered the
stark terror of riding in the E7 seat of an S-8 sub-
hunter "Snark" jet and coming in for my virgin
landing on an aircraft carrier. Trusting entirely to the
guy on the other end made me more nervous than the
idea of landing on a postage stamp. Well, this time,
for better or worse, I was the guy with the stick;
considering that I'd never flown anything but a troop
shimmy over some mountains, I almost wished I were
back in the S-8.
     I threw the switches, pushed forward on the throttle
(oddly similar to a passenger airliner), and the rocket
slid along the tube, launching at ten g's. Arlene was
already out, of course, and missed the pleasure of
blacking out with me.
     Suddenly, I discovered myself in a strange room, a
faint hissing catching my attention. Black and white,
no color ... I knew I should know where I was, what
all these things, this equipment around me, was.
I should know my name too, I guessed.
     Then the sound cut back in; fly, someone said. A
command? Fly, fly--"Fly." It was me, my lips, saying
the word fly ... the name! Fly, me; my name.
Then I saw color and recognized the jerry-rigged
blinking lights and liquid-crystal displays of the mail
tube. I'd installed them myself; the mail doesn't need
to see where it's going, but we did.
     Through the slit of a viewscreen, I saw deepest blue
with faint, cotton-candy wisps, strings flashing past. I
glanced at the altimeter--much too high for clouds.
Ionized gases?
     Then something socked me in the face, like a 10mm
shell, and agony exploded across my face. At first it
was bilateral; then it focused right behind my eye-
balls, like God's own worst migraine. For a few
seconds I thought my head literally was going to
detonate. Then it faded as the blood finally
repressurized my cranial arteries and rebooted my
brain. I looked at the chronometer: the entire black-
out had lasted only forty-five seconds.
     It could have been forty-five years.
A low groan announced Arlene's return to con-
sciousness. "Fly," she moaned, "good luck."
     I was too busy to say anything. But it was good
having her back again. The calculations she'd already
worked out for our glide path were okay, and I used
the retros to get us on her highway.
     As we came in, the ride got bumpier and rougher.
The interior of the little craft started heating up.
Being so close together made us sweat all the faster.
When it got over fifty degrees centigrade, beads of
perspiration poured into my eyes, interfering with
vision.
     But the temp continued to rise. The mail tubes are
supposed to be insulated--but the skin on this one
was built for Mars.
     In Earth atmosphere, we were being baked. The
temp boiled up past seventy degrees, and I was gasping
for air, every breath searing my lungs. My skin turned
red and I could barely hold the controls. Another
minute and we would be dead.
     6
Fly!" Arlene screamed. "Blow the oxygen!
     We'll lose it, but it'll heat up and blow out the
exhaust, cooling the interior!"
     "Not again!" I said.
"Huh?"
     "We'll be low on air again!"
"Do it, Fly, or we'll fry."
     We took turns making the other face unpleasant
facts. It was something like being married.
     I did as she commanded. The cooling effect made a
real difference. My brain was still on fire, but at least I
could think again.
     "So what systems still aren't working?" she asked
next, still gasping from each searing breath.
This seemed like an opportune moment to be
     completely honest. "Now that you mention it," I
mentioned, "the only one I'm worried about is the
landing system."
     "What?"
"The thingamabob would have come in useful for
landing. What do they call it? Oh yes, the aerial-
braking system."
     She sighed. If there had been more room in our
little cocoon, she might have shrugged as well. "By-
gones," she said. "Sorry for the trouble I caused."
"Arlene, don't be ridiculous! I was having crazy
dreams and was about to go off the deep end myself.
You just went first because you're . . . smaller." It
occurred to me that we were having more of a
discussion than was wise under the circumstances.
"So how in hell do we land this puppy?" No sooner
were these words out of her mouth than Arlene
started yawning.
     I figured we should try and set it down anywhere on
dry land. Live or die, I wasn't in the mood for a swim.
If we survived, we could get our bearings anywhere on
Earth--pick a destination and then haul butt.
We didn't have any time to waste. Thanks to our
stunt with the oxygen, the O2 to CO2 ratio was
dropping. I was in even less mood for us to become
goofy from oxygen deprivation after watching Arlene
go nuts before--thanks, Mr. Disney, but I'm not
going back on that ride.
     I had to explain this to Arlene, but she was asleep
again so I explained it to the Martian instead. He was
a little green guy, about three feet high, and I was glad
to see him. "About time one of you showed up," I
said. "We always expected to see guys like you up here
instead of all this medieval stuff."
     "Perfectly understandable," he said in the voice of
W. C. Fields. "These demons are a pain. But they're
welcome to Deimos."
     "Why is that?" I asked.
"Confidentially, it's an ugly moon, don't you think?
Not at all a work of beauty like Phobos, a drinking
man's moon. Speaking of which, you wouldn't have
some whiskey on you?"
     "Sorry, only water."
He was very offended. "You mean that liquid fish
fornicate in? We Martians don't care for the stuff. You
can drown in it, you know. Now ours is a nice, dry
planet, rusty brown like that car of yours after you
abandoned it to the elements. Mars is nice and cold,
good practice for the grave. Are you sure you don't
have any booze?"
     I figured he was bringing up drowning just to scare
me. If Arlene and I didn't burn up in the atmosphere,
there was always a good chance of winding up in the
drink and drowning like the Shuttle pioneers had in
the 1980s.
     Besides, he'd raised a certain issue and I wanted an
answer. "Why does Phobos look better to you than
Deimos?" I asked.
     "My dear fellow, Phobos is the inner moon of
Mars. Deimos was always on the outs even before
those hobgoblins hijacked it. The outs is a bad place
to be, and you are out of time and going to die and
betray Arlene and betray the Earth, you puny little
man with your delusions."
     While he was talking, he was growing in size, and
sharp teeth protruded beyond his sneering lips; the
eyes flamed red, as the rockets flamed red, as the sky
was underneath and overhead all at the same time.
And I was screaming.
     "You're one of them! You're a demon-imp-specter-
thing. You tricked me."
     "Fly," said a comforting voice from behind the
Martian. "Fly, you're hallucinating."
     "I knew that," I told her as the Martian faded from
view. "I knew it all along."
     A quick check of the cabin gave a head count of (1)
myself, (2) Arlene, (3) no Martians. I checked again to
make sure. Yep, just two humans. No monsters. No
Martians. Not much air. Definitely not enough air.
"We've got to land this quickly," I said.
     "Um ... if it's all the same to you, Fly, I can wait
until we can land it safely."
     The atmosphere got thick enough that I pulled the
cord to extend our mini-wings. Instantly, we started
buffeting like mad, shaking so hard I thought my
innards would become outards. We rolled, pitched,
yawed--triple-threat!--and it was all I could do to
hang on to the ragged edge of Arlene's computer-
projected glide path.
     The screen displayed a series of concentric squares
that gave the illusion of flying through an infinite
succession of square wire hoops. So long as I kept
inside them, I should go where she projected, some-
where in North America, she said; even she wasn't
sure where.
     But I kept cutting through the path, coloring out-
side the lines. I couldn't hold it! I'd yank on the stick
and physically wrench us back through the wire
frames and out the other side (they turned from red to
black when I was briefly on the meatball). The best I
could do was stay within spitting distance of my
proper course . . . and naturally, we were running too
hot, much too fast. We were going to overshoot our
mark--possibly straight into the Pacific Ocean.
I barely hung on, abandoning retros to guide our
two-man "cruise missile" by fins, air-braking to spill
as much excess velocity as possible. The ship started
shaking. An old silver tooth filling started to ache.
Arlene leaned back against the seat, muscles in her
jaw tightening, eyes getting wider and wider. I think
she was starting to appreciate the gravity of our
situation.
     North America unwound beneath the window like
a quilt airing out on a sunny day. We were over the
Mississippi, sinking lower, falling west, descending
fast. Then we entered a cloud bank. We weren't there
very long.
     "I know where we are!" shouted Arlene, voice
starting to sound funny from the breathing problem. I
placed it too. We'd popped out of the cloud bank
about 150 kilometers due west of Salt Lake City. The
Bonneville salt flats were ideal for a landing--a vast,
dry lake bed, nothing to hit but dirt. Very hard dirt.
But we had a chance.
     "Spill the fuel!" she screamed, right in my ear,
straining against the buffeting. At least we were low
enough that we could breathe. I yanked the lever,
dumping what little JP-9 remained in the tanks.
The cabin was getting hot again, the structure of the
rocket shaking like we were in a Mixmaster, and it
was now or never. "Hold on!" I shouted, thinking
how stupid it sounded but needing to say something.
Arlene screamed like a banshee--a much more
     insightful comment.
We came down fast and hard, finally striking the
ground at Mach 0.5. The ship shredded on impact,
skipping like a rock on the waters of a salt-white lake.
Then it rolled, and Arlene's elbow jammed into my
side so hard it knocked the breath out of me.
End over end we tumbled, and my brains, already
fried, scrambled so I didn't know dirt from sky. We
shed bits and pieces from the ship--only the titanium
frame was left, but still we kept rolling.
     The ship finally skidded to a stop, on its side, with
me underneath Arlene.
     For a good five minutes, felt like five hours, we lay
silently, dazed, wondering if we had made it or not
. . . waiting for the world to stop spinning.
"Are you all right?" Arlene managed to ask.
     "I think we're alive," I said.
The fuel was completely spent, which was just fine
with me. No risk of fire or explosion. Now if we could
just get out of the thing.
     Fortunately, the door on Arlene's side wasn't
jammed. In fact, it wasn't even with us anymore.
Arlene stumbled out, falling heavily with a grunt. I
followed somewhat more gracefully, which was a
switch,
     We'd suffered no injuries, thank God; I didn't want
us to wind up sitting ducks. If aliens had taken over
Utah--a belief held by one of my old nuns many
years before the invasion--then we must be on our
guard. Someone, or something, would come to find
out what had just made a smoking hole in the salt lick.
We took a moment to enjoy being alive and in one
piece, enjoying the dusk in Utah, breathing the best
air we'd tasted in months. Then we took inventory.
The food and water came through. But the weapons
were trashed.
     "You said we couldn't do it," she teased me.
"Never listen to a pessimist," I answered, adding,
"and the world is so full of them you might as well
give up." She laughed as she playfully punched my
arm, numbing me.
     Astonishingly, Arlene's GPS wrist locator was still
working. That was one tough piece of equipment! I
thought maybe I should buy stock in the company;
then I wondered whether any companies still existed.
Maybe the monsters had done what no government
was able to do: end all commerce and starve the
survivors.
     She sat cross-legged and fiddled with the thing,
trying to get a fix on our exact position. The satellite
should have responded immediately, spotting us with-
in a meter or two.
     "Getting anything?" I asked, listening to the sym-
phony of white noise coming off her arm.
     "Nada," she said. "I'll bet the sat is still up there,
but the Bad Guys must have encrypted the signal.
Maybe so humans can't use them in combat."
     "I wish they were all as dumb as the demons," I
said.
     "Yeah, one spidermind goes a long way. But who
cares, Fly? We've beaten the odds again. We're alive,
dammit!" She ran across the sand like a kid let loose
at the beach. Then she gestured for me to join her. I
ran over and grabbed at her. She threw me off balance
and I took a tumble in the sand.
     "Clumsy!" she said, sounding as young as she had
when sleepwalking through her waking nightmare on
Deimos; but now was a lot more pleasant.
     "We don't have time for this, you know," I said, but
my heart wasn't it.
     "We don't have time to be alive, or to breathe air.
But here we are, still in one piece. God, I didn't think
we were going to make it. We got down from orbit
with nothing but spare parts, spit, and duct tape, and
our bare hands--hah!"
     "Frankly, my dear, I had my doubts," I admitted. I
couldn't help running after her. She was right. We
kept coming through stuff that should have killed us
twenty times over. We weren't indestructible, but I
was beginning to believe in something I'd always
hated: luck.
     People who accomplish nothing in their lives al-
ways attribute the success of everybody else to good
luck or knavery. I believe you make your own luck:
"Chance favors the prepared mind." But in combat,
there are too many random factors to calculate.
Arlene and I were feeling cocky. We had plenty of
reason to be thankful.
     "I wonder what the radiation level is here," I said.
"Do we have to know?" she asked, skipping. "It
didn't look like any bombs were going off in this
area."
     "Not while we were watching," I pointed out.
"There's no reason to nuke a desert. It's already a
wasteland."
     "You nuke military bases, Arlene. And don't forget
the nuclear testing that's gone on in areas like this."
"Human wars, Fly; and human preparation for
     war. Besides, we don't know for certain we were
seeing nuclear weapons going off; they could be some
other kind of weapon without fallout. Makes it easier
to take over later."
     "Some of these beasties seem to thrive on radia-
tion."
     She stopped playing in the sand and sat down. She
didn't say anything at first, as she poured sand out of
her right boot, but then had an answer for me as she
began unlacing her left one: "The radiation levels on
the base weren't healthy for humans, but they weren't
anywhere near what you'd get from a full-scale nucle-
ar exchange."
     The lady had a point. "You're probably right. You
can thank me for going to such lengths to bring us
down in this location."
     "Ha," she said. "Pure luck. You brought us down
where you could."
     "Skill and perseverance, dear lady. One of these
days, I'll explain my theory of luck to you."
7
     For the moment, I was glad to join her,
sitting in the sandbox. I ignored the little voice in the
back of my head that worked overtime to keep us
alive. It said we didn't have a moment to waste; the
monsters of doom could be upon us any second,
burning away our little victory faster than the setting
sun.
     Comes a time when you have to say the hell with it,
if only for a moment. Arlene and I had recently faced
the worst thing anyone can face, worse than the
monsters or dying in space. We knew what it meant to
lose your sanity . . . and come back to yourself again.
Arlene started whistling "Molly Malone." She'd
picked one of the few songs to which I knew the
words. I sang along. All that was missing was a bottle
of Tullamore Dew, the world's finest sipping whiskey.
As it was, our duet seemed to transform the lengthen-
ing shadows of dusk in Utah into the cool glades of
Ireland. I wondered if doom had come there. Were
there demons in Dublin? Did the men there see little
green leprechauns instead of Martians in their mo-
ment of madness? I wondered about the whole world,
and it was too much for me.
     Right now the world was a stretch of desert in Utah.
What we could do for ourselves, for the human race,
for the world, would be determined here, as it had
been on Deimos, and before that, Phobos. We'd take
it one world at a time.
     I lay back happily for a few moments, watching the
stars wink into existence in the darkening sky.
As night fell, we spotted a glow, due east. That was
the way to bet--Salt Lake City, I guessed. We gath-
ered together what had survived the crash and fol-
lowed the light. We took a break at nine P.M., another
at midnight.
     "How long do you think this is going to take?" she
asked.
     "Not sure, but I'm glad we brought the provisions."
The bag survived the crash just as nicely as we did. We
had water. We had biscuits and granola bars. We had
flashlights (which we wisely didn't use). But I sure as
hell wished we had some weapons, other than one
puny knife in the provisions bag.
     We trekked at night and slept by day. Hell, I saw
Lawrence of Arabia. After Phobos and Deimos and
nearly splattering ourselves over old terra firma, after
all we'd survived, I'd be damned if we were going to
cash in our chips here. Hell, we could go to Nevada to
do that!
     The water held out better than the food. We hud-
dled together in the cold during the day, when we
slept. We could have made a fire, but no point giving
away our location with unnecessary light. And there
was one thing about the situation creepy enough to
encourage caution, even though we hadn't run into
any trouble yet.
     Arlene was the first to notice it: "Fly, there are no
sounds."
     "What do you mean?" I asked. We crunched along
in the night, heading toward a glow that seemed
barely bigger than it was three days ago.
     "The night creatures. No owls . . ."
"Are there owls in the desert?"
     "I don't know, maybe not. But there should be
something. No bugs. No lizards. No nothin'."
I thought about it. "If we've seen the collapse of
civilization, you'd expect wild dogs."
     "There's no coyotes. Nothing. Even out here, there
ought to be something. Unless everything was killed
by the weapons."
     "No, that can't be right. We'd be puking up our guts
by now from poison or radiation. That light suggests
somebody's still in business."
     "I hope so," she said. "So you think that's Salt Lake
City."
     "Should be."
"Salt Lake City, Utah?"
     "Unless it's wintering in Florida."
She was silent for a hundred paces; then she cleared
her throat. "Fly, I have to confess something to you.
Again."
     "Anytime."
"I sort of have a problem with the Mormon
     Church," she said.
Making out her face in the dim light wasn't easy. I
wished we had a full moon instead of the sliver
hanging over us like a scythe. "You were a Mormon?"
I asked.
     "No. But my brother was, briefly."
"You blame the church for ... for whatever hap-
pened?"
     She shook her head. "No, I guess not. He had
problems before he joined the Church; had problems
when he left."
     "Do you think he might be here?" I asked.
"Nah. We lived in North Hollywood. He left for
Utah when he became a Mormon; but after he left the
Church, I don't know what became of him. I don't
care if I ever see him again."
     "I'll never bring it up," I said.
"There's another reason I'm telling you this," she
went on. "I became obsessed with Mormonism while
he was with them. I read books by them and against
them. I even read the Book of Mormon."
     "Maybe that could come in useful," I suggested.
"I doubt it. It just makes me more prejudiced.
Look, Fly, if we find living human beings at the end of
this, we must stand with them and fight with them.
I'm promising you right now I won't discuss religion
with any of those patriarchal..."
     She paused long enough for me to jump in: "I get
the picture."
     "Do you have any opinions abut them?" she asked,
quite fairly.
     "Well, I read an article about them having a strong
survivalist streak; that they stockpile a year's supply
of food and stuff like that. You'll get a kick out of this!
When I visited L.A. once, I took in the sights:
Disneyland, the La Brea Tar Pits, Paramount studios,
the Acker Mansion, and I even found time to go into
their big temple at the end of Overland Avenue.
There's an angel up top with a trumpet; I mistakenly
called him Gabriel."
     "They must have loved that; it's the Angel
Moroni."
     "Well, now I know."
"Heh. I used to drop the i off that name when I used
it."
     I took a deep breath. "Arlene, I'm going to hold you
to that promise not to talk theology with them."
"Scout's honor," she said.
     "Were you ever a Scout?"
She didn't answer again.
     We kept the flashlights off; the glow on the horizon
was the only illumination I wanted in that desert. It
was easy to follow the direction at night. We made
sure that we didn't waste opportunities.
     "You're burning night-light," Arlene would say
when it was her turn to wake me up. Then she'd
snicker, Something amused her, but she didn't let me
in on it.
     Turned out that we ran out of food, but we had
more water than we needed. It took us five days to get
to Salt Lake City, the center of what once had been
the Mormon world. And by God, it still was!
     We lay on our bellies in some brush, shielding out
eyes from the sun, leaning against a side-paneled
truck.
     "They're people!" marveled Arlene as we watched
hundreds of men on the streets in the early dawn.
They relieved other men who'd obviously been doing
the night shift.
     "Where do you think the women are?" I whispered.
"Home, minding the kids. Mormons are so damned
patriarchal."
     "Arlene . . ."
We were in a good spot to see plenty, behind a
wrecked truck on a rise. As the sun crawled up the
sky, shafts of light came through the broken windows
like laser beams, one blinding me for a second. We
positioned ourselves to see more. There was plenty to
see.
     The streets of this garrison town had over a thou-
sand men with guns, and to my surprise I made out a
few women and teenage girls toting heavy artillery.
Arlene gave me one of her funny looks.
     I didn't make her take back anything she'd said;
when a society is threatened, it will do what it must or
go down fast.
     "You don't think they might be working with the
aliens?" asked my buddy. I had the same thought. But
they didn't act zombified, and we'd learned that the
monsters preferred human lackeys in that condition.
The spidermind had made only one exception when it
needed knowledge in the human brain of poor Bill
Ritch.
     We had to make contact with these people, but I
preferred doing it in a way that wouldn't get us shot.
While I was formulating a plan, Arlene tapped me on
the shoulder.
     I turned and found myself staring down both bar-
rels of a twelve-gauge duck gun. It had gorgeous,
inlaid detail work running all seventy-five centimeters
of the stock and barrel. . . and it was attached to a
beefy hand connected to a large body with a grinning,
boyish face topping it off. Twenty-two, twenty-three,
tops.
     "How do?" said the man. His buddy was a lot
thinner, and he held an old Ruger Mini-14 pointed at
Arlene.
     He caught my expression and grinned at me as if he
could read my mind. Here was proof positive we were
facing honest-to-God, living humans: they had pride
in a good weapon.
     "Hi," I said, moving my eyes from man to man.
"Good morning," said Arlene.
     "Hey," said the other man by way of greeting,
noticing how my eyes kept drifting to his piece. "Took
me quite a while to get one of these," he said
conversationally.
     "Beautiful weapon," I said, noticing that the beefy
guy was still calm.
     The thin one nodded and said, "They are compact,
easy handling, fast shooting and hard hitting." He
paused, then added: "Don't you agree?"
     Thunk. The penny dropped. They were testing us!
"Oh, yes," said Arlene, jumping in. The thin guy
looked at her a little funny and waited for me to say
something.
     "One of my favorite weapons," I said. "Hardly any
kick. Not like the bigger calibers."
     Finally the big guy spoke again: "Jerry, these people
don't want a lecture."
     Jerry squinted at him. "They're military. Look at
their clothes." We weren't asked to confirm or deny
anything, so we kept our mouths shut. Jerry had
plenty of words left in him: "They're interested in a
good weapon. Aren't you?"
     He looked straight at me and I answered right away:
"I sure am, especially that one you've got."
Jerry smiled and went on: "Albert gets tired of
hearing me go on about what a good model this is.
They were even reasonably priced until they were
outlawed."
     "Not a problem now," said Arlene. "I'm sure
there's plenty of squashed zombies you can take one
off'n."
     Whenever she spoke, the men seemed a bit uncom-
fortable. I had the impression she was getting off
on it.
     Arlene looked over at me and winked. We'd fought
enough battles to read each other's expressions and
body language. Her expression told me that things
were looking up as far as she was concerned, but she
couldn't resist getting in the act: "I like an M-14," she
said.
     Jesus, it was like going shooting with Gunnery
Sergeant Goforth and his redneck buddies!
     The men started to warm to her a little. "Good
choice for a military gal," said Albert. We all just kind
of stood there for a moment, smiling at each other,
and then Albert broke the ice by changing the subject.
He asked, in the same friendly tone of voice: "You
wouldn't happen to be in league with those ministers
of Satan invading our world?"
     "We were wondering the same thing about you,"
said Arlene. I gave her a dirty look for that.
The beefy kid with the double-barreled duck gun
chuckled. "Don't mind her saying that, mister. It
shows a proper godly attitude. I hope you both check
out; I like you. We talk the same language. But we
can't take any chances."
     They searched us both thoroughly, found the
knife, and impounded it. We were weaponless. In a
way, I was glad. These guys weren't acting like ama-
teurs . . . which meant they had a chance against the
invaders.
     "Okay," said the man with the bird gun, "we'll take
you to the President of the Council of Twelve."
Arlene grimaced, which told me she knew what he
was talking about; but she kept her promise. Not a
word came out of her about the religious stuff. The
title sounded impressive enough to tell me that the
Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day Saints was
still in business big-time.
     Maybe she was right, and they were a cult; but I
don't know any difference between a cult and a
religion except as a popularity contest. They had
survived, and we needed allies against the monsters.
I knew one more thing about the Mormons that I
hadn't mentioned to Arlene during our little chat in
the desert. A friend I trusted with Washington con-
nections told me that a good part of Mormon self-
reliance was to really prepare for every eventuality.
After their tumultuous history, extreme caution was
understandable. Result: there were a lot of Mormons
in the government ... in the FBI, in the various
services, in the CIA, even in NASA. God help anyone
who tried to play Hitler with the Mormons as the
Jews! The Mormons should be ideal allies against a
literal demonic invasion.
     Arlene and I would find out soon enough.
8
     As we were led through the streets of SLC, I
allowed myself to hope that Arlene and I had lucked
out by landing here. If I were still a praying man, I'd
burn candles and say a few Ave Marias that we
wouldn't find a spidermind sitting in the Mormon
Tabernacle . . . which loomed closer and closer, obvi-
ously our destination.
     The people in the street gave us a wide berth as we
passed, but they didn't act unfriendly--just cautious.
No one acted like an idiot. I hoped it stayed that way.
Suddenly, a man on a big motorcycle roared over to
us and stopped a few inches away, kicking up dust. He
wore a business suit. "Hey, Jerry," he said.
"Hey, Nate," said Jerry. "Folks, this is my brother,
Nate. I'd introduce you, but I don't know your
names,"
     "Now, Jerry," said Albert, "you know better than
that. The President of the Twelve hasn't interviewed
them yet. They should give their names to him."
"Sorry."
     "Sounds like they know your names already," said
the man on the cycle, taking off his helmet. These
guys were twins.
     Although Arlene kept her promise about not dis-
cussing theological matters, she leapt into any other
waters that gurgled up around us. "That's a bad
machine," she said.
     Nate proved to be his brother's brother: "You like
this?" he asked with a big grin.
     "They have good taste in guns," said Jerry, spurring
them on. Albert groaned.
     Nate was on a roll: "BMW Paris-Dakar, 1000
cc's ..." He and Arlene went on about the bike for a
few minutes.
     Part of me wanted to strangle the girl; but another
part appreciated what she was doing. Putting the
other guys at their ease is a critical strategy. There
were a lot more men in the street than women, but our
captors--hosts?--remained respectful and polite in
Arlene's presence. A very civilized society.
". . . and the glove compartment can hold five
grenades!" announced Nate, topping off his presenta-
tion.
     "That does it," said Albert. "If these nice people
are spies, why don't you just give them mimeo-
graphed reports?"
     In the short time we'd been prisoners, I'd learned
that there was no genuine military discipline here. I
had mixed feelings about this. The good thing was
that I couldn't believe these casual people had been
co-opted by the invaders. They still talked and acted
like free men. Very loquacious free men!
     As far as getting their president to cooperate with
us, it could go either way. In the land of the civilians,
the Marine is king ... or a fall guy. I was impatient to
find out which.
     "Oh, I almost forgot," said Nate. "I have a message
for you. The President hasn't returned yet."
"You should have told us that right off," said Albert
peevishly. "We'll take them to Holding."
     We entered the Tabernacle. It was nice and cool,
with a fresh wood smell that was clean and bracing.
The floors were highly polished. You wouldn't notice
anything different from the world I'd left on a court-
martial charge that now seemed to belong to a differ-
ent universe.
     Arlene wasn't the only one with a lot of reading
under her belt. I didn't know a whole lot about the
Mormons, although I knew a bit more than I told
her--but I'd read the Bible all the way through,
enough to recognize things the Mormons took for
inspiration from what they accepted as the earlier
Revealed Word.
     In addition, the nuns taught a little about compara-
tive religion, probably so we'd be better missionaries.
I remembered that God was supposed to have given
Moses directions for the construction of the Taberna-
cle. The structure was to be a house constructed of a
series of boards of a special wood, overlaid with gold,
set on end into sockets of silver. In other words, it
wasn't Saint Pete's, but it was no Alabama revival tent
either. The Mormons adapted the idea for a perma-
nent standing structure.
     Right outside the Tabernacle were some more con-
ventional office buildings. We entered one, and were
led into an office by Albert. "I'll bring you something
to eat and drink," he said. I was hungry and thirsty
enough to settle for bread and water. A minute later
Albert returned with bread and water, then left us
alone.
     "Damn," I said; "I was hoping for a more splendor-
ous galley."
     I walked over to a small table, and picked up the
sole object on it: the Book of Mormon: Another
Testament of Jesus Christ. I felt puckish and decided
to tease Arlene a bit. I thought she'd pushed the
envelope too much, encouraging the more talkative of
our captors.
     "Bet you can't remember all the books in here,
Arlene."
     She gave me that look of hers. "Will you bet me the
next decent weapon we find?"
     "Deal," I said.
"Okay," she replied, and rattled them off: "First
and Second Books of Nephi, Jacob, Enos, Jarom,
Omni, the Words of Mormon, Book of Mosiah, Alma,
Helaman, Third and Fourth Nephi, Book of Mormon,
Ether, Moroni. You're not getting out of this, Fly. I get
first pick on the next piece!"
     "Damn!" I said, thoroughly impressed.
"Watch what you say near a holy place."
     "Don't worry about it," came a third voice. Albert
had rejoined us without knocking.
     "Don't you knock?" asked Arlene.
"As soon as you're no longer prisoners," he said,
closing the door behind him. "I just wanted you to
know that I don't think you're spies for the demons."
"We call them aliens," I said. The medieval termi-
nology didn't bother me when Arlene and I were using
it to distinguish the different kinds of monsters. It
seemed very different when talking to a deeply reli-
gious perseon. These things from space could be
killed. They were created by scientific means. In no
way should they be confused with immortal spirits
against which all the firepower in the galaxy would
mean nothing.
     "I understand," said Albert. "Would you mind
telling me who you are and how you came to be
here?"
     "Won't the President ask us that?" I asked.
"Yes."
     "Then why should we tell you?" asked Arlene.
"Because I don't have to be as cautious, and I'm a
fellow soldier."
     "So you should tell us about yourself," I said.
"In time. You don't have to tell me anything either,
but you should consider it."
     "Well," I said, thinking on my feet, "if we talk to
one Mormon, we should probably talk to the leader."
Albert laughed. "We're not all Mormons here," he
said. "Just most of us."
     "Oh?" I said, unconvinced.
"Uh, I am," he cautioned. "Think about it. We're
fighting the common enemy of mankind. We don't
care if you're Mormons. We care that you can be
trusted."
     "Makes sense," admitted Arlene in a tone of voice
so natural that I realized she'd been subtly mocking
them before.
     "I'm of the Church," continued Albert, "but Jerry
and Nate are Jehovah's Witnesses."
     "I thought they didn't fight," said Arlene,
surprised.
     "They are not pacifists, but neither are they of the
Latter-Day Dispensations," he said as warning bells
went off in my head. I prayed I could count on
Arlene's promise to keep her trap shut . . . but she
pressed her lips pretty tight.
     "Latter-day what?"
Albert was more succinct than his friends: "They
believe all the world's governments are works of the
devil. They won't fight their fellow man at the com-
mand of a state. But they can fight unhuman monsters
until Judgment Day."
     "I get it," I said. "Draft protesters in World War
Two--"
     "But volunteers for this," Albert finished.
"What do you mean by, uh, 'dispensation'?"
     He laughed. Apparently we'd fallen into the hands
of someone lacking in missionary zeal, for which I
was grateful. "The United States Constitution was
ordained by God. That's why we didn't like seeing it
subverted. We never know if a governmental person is
good or bad until we see where his loyalty lies. But
you two made a wonderful impression on the Wit-
nesses; I think you'll do fine with the President. If you
change your mind about chatting with me, you will
find me easily enough." He left us with the promise
we would see the President soon.
     Three hours later we were led to the office of the
President of the Twelve. A clean-shaven, elderly man
with pure white hair, a dark tan, and a tailored suit
got up from behind a walnut desk and rested his
hands on his blotter. He kept his distance. He had a
judge's face, carved in stone. If we were assassins, he
was giving us a clear shot at him. But Albert and Jerry
continued to baby-sit, fingers on triggers.
     Mexican standoff. He sized us up. We did the same
to him. He reminded me of a senior colonel in the
Corps, a man used to giving orders.
     Finally, he coughed. "I'm the President here," he
said.
     "You make it sound like President of the United
States," I said.
     He didn't seem to mind. "Might as well be," he
said, "under the circumstances. Who are you?"
We gave him name, rank, and serial number. Being
a gentleman, I let Arlene go first. Then he asked the
sixty-four-trillion-dollar question: "How is it you
come to be here?"
     Arlene laughed and let him have it: "Fly, here--
that's his nickname--Fly and I single-handedly
kicked the spit out of the entire Deimos division of
the alien demons. They moved the Martian moon
into orbit around Earth, but we cleaned their clocks."
The leader of the Mormons said, "This is a time for
mighty warriors. We have many prophecies to this
effect. In the Book of Alma there is a verse that I find
indispensable for morale:
     "Behold, I am in my anger, and also my people;
ye have sought to murder us, and we have only
sought to defend ourselves."
     He smiled, pausing before continuing.
"But behold, if ye seek to destroy us more we will
seek to destroy you; yea, and we will seek our
land, the land of our first inheritance."
     "Those words were spoken by Moroni. We must
gird our loins for battle against the ultimate enemy. At
such times as this even women must be used in a
manner unnatural to them. Do you know how much
Delta-V is required to move a moon, even one as
small as Deimos? Why should I believe you?"
     I blinked, nonplussed by the change in subject.
Glancing quickly at Arlene, I saw she was controlling
her reaction to the "unnatural" crack, her face impas-
sive. Good girl!
     "We, ah, fight the same enemy," I said.
"This is what you purport. You also claim to have
hopped out of orbit and landed on your feet. Pray that
we may prove both to our satisfaction. Until such
time, we must be careful. If what you say is true, you
will be able to demonstrate this to us on a mission.
Only then, if you earn our trust, will you"--he
pointedly stared at me, ignoring Arlene--"be allowed
access to our special wisdom. The audience is over,
and good luck to you."
     I worried that Arlene might say something stupid
when I saw her mouth open and the danger sign of her
eyebrows rising faster than any rocket. Hell, I was
worried about myself. But we were ushered out of
there without any disasters.
     "As far as I'm concerned," said Albert, leading us
back to our room, accompanied by Jerry, "you just
flunked spy school."
     "Huh?"
"I don't imagine a spy would concoct so ridiculous
a story and annoy the President so thoroughly."
I said nothing; privately, I thought that was exactly
what a spy might do. It worked, didn't it?
     We felt tension leaking from the corridor, like air
escaping from the dome on Deimos. At least the
President was taking some kind of chance on us. He
didn't realize how big a chance he'd taken talking that
way to Arlene.
     "We belong to the brotherhood of man," Albert
said. "If you think you have problems now, just wait
until people begin believing your story. Then we'll
start treating you like angels!"
     9
I guess they believed our story, somewhat at
least. Fly and I were left alone at last when that rugged
stalwart, Albert Whatever, scurried off on some er-
rand.
     Fly gestured me close. "We really should report in,"
he whispered in my ear.
     "Report in? To whom?" A good question. If the
country were as devastated as we'd been led to
believe, there wasn't much of a military command
structure left to report to anybody.
     If. . . I saw at once where Fly was coming from.
"How much do we really know about these guys?"
asked Fly, confirming my cognition. "Whose side are
they on?"
     "You'd have a hard time persuading me they're
demon-lovers," I said.
     "All right . . . maybe. They're patriots. But are they
right?"
     Wasn't much I could say to that. Fly had a point. . .
as patriotic and pro-human as these Mormons might
be, they still might be wrong about the extent of the
collapse. "You're saying they could be deluded by
their apocalyptic religion."
     He raised his brows. "Mormons aren't apocalyptic,
Arlene. I think you're confusing them with certain
branches of Christianity. I'm only saying that they're
pretty cut off from information . . . the whole govern-
ment might look like it's collapsed from this view-
point; but maybe if we contacted somebody some-
where else, in the Pentagon or at least an actual
Marine Corps base, maybe we'd get a different pic-
ture."
     "All right. Who, then?"
"Chain of command, Arlene. Who do you think we
should contact?"
     I'm always forgetting about the omnipresent chain.
Usually, all I see are enlisted guys like me, maybe one
C.O.--Weems, in our case. I'm not used to thinking
of the Great Chain of Being rising above my head all
the way up to the C-in-C, the President of the United
States. Guess that's why Fly makes the big bucks (heh)
as a noncom, while I'm just a grunt.
     "Um, Major Boyd, I guess. Or the great-grandboss,
Colonel Karapetian."
     "Hm . . . I'm betting this is a bit above m'lord
Boyd's head. I think we should take this up with God
Himself: the colonel."
     "I agree completely. Got the phone number?"
"Yeah, well, that's the next problem. Surely in a
facility this size, there has to be a radio room some-
where, wouldn't you think?"
     We did a lot of thinking over the next hour; we also
did a lot of quiet, careful questioning, staying away
from those obviously "under arms," questioning the
less suspicious civilians instead. But what we mostly
did was a lot of walking. My dogs were barking like
Dobermans long before we found anything radio-
roomlike.
     The "compound" actually comprised a whole series
of buildings, different clumps far away, and included
a large portion of downtown Salt Lake City. There
were other buildings and residences all around, of
course; SLC is big. Well not compared to my old
hometown of L.A., of course, but you get the idea.
"The compound" might include two buildings and
not include the building in between them; it wasn't
defined geographically.
     However, we quickly discovered we were restricted
to a small, two-block radius surrounding the Taberna-
cle. An electrified fence cut that central core off from
the rest of the facility (and the rest of the city); guards
patrolled the fence like a military base; there were
even suspicious pillboxes with tiny bits of what might
have been the barrels of crew-served weapons poking
out, and piles of camouflaged tarps that might conceal
tanks or Bradleys. And the guards were as tight about
controlling what left the core as they were about what
entered.
     I saw a lump that looked suspiciously like an
M-2/A-2 tank, state of the art; I turned to point it
out to Fly, but he was busy staring at the tall office
building at our backs. "What's that up top of that sky-
scraper?" he asked.
     "Skyscraper? You've lived in too many small towns,
Fly-boy."
     "Yeah, yeah. What's up top there? That metal
thing?"
     "Um ... a TV aerial."
"Are you sure? Look again."
     I stared, squinting to clear up my mild astigmatism.
"Huh, I see what you mean. It could be, but I'm not
sure. You think it's a radio antenna, right?"
"I don't know what they're supposed to look like
when they're stationary, only what they look like on
the box we carry with us."
     "Well, you have an urgent appointment, Fly? Let's
check it out."
     "Sure hope they have a working elevator," he said,
surprising me; I thought after our experiences on
Deimos, he'd never want to look at another lift again.
There was an armed guard at the front entrance of
the building, which was a mere fifteen stories tall. . .
hardly a "skyscraper." The rear entrance was barri-
caded. The guard unshipped the Sig-Cow rifle he
carried. "Aren't you the two unbelievers who claim
they stopped the aliens cold on Deimos?"
     "That's we," I said, "Unbelievers 'R' Us."
Fly hushed me. He always claims I make things
worse in any confrontational situation, but I just
don't see it.
     "The President sent us on an inspection tour," said
Fly with the sort of easy, confident lying I admired so
much but could never pull off. "Supposed to 'famil-
iarize' ourselves with your SOPs." He rolled his eyes;
you could hear the quotation marks around familiar-
ize. "As if we haven't had enough military procedures
for a lifetime!"
     The guard shook his head, instantly sympathetic.
"Ain't it the truth? Few weeks ago, you know what I
was? I was a cook at the Elephant Grill, you know, up
at Third? So what do they make me when the war
breaks out? A sentry!"
     "You know this building well?"
"Well, I should! My fiancee worked here. Before the
war."
     "Look, can you come along with us, show us the
place? I come from a small town, and we don't have
buildings this size. You're not stuck as the only guard,
are you?" There were no other guards in sight; I'm
sure Fly noticed that as well as I.
     "'Fraid so, Corporal."
"Fly. Fly Taggart."
     "I'm afraid so, Fly. I can't leave. Look, you can't get
lost. It's just a big, tall square. See the Tabernacle
there? Anytime you get lost, just walk to the windows
and walk around until you see the Tabernacle. You
can't miss it."
     "You sure it'll be okay?"
"You can't miss it. No problemo."
     "Look, if I get in trouble, is there a phone I can call
down here on?"
     "Sure, use the black phone near the elevator, the
one with no buttons. Just pick it up; it'll ring here."
"Thanks. This way? The elevators over here?"
The helpful sentry showed us how to get to the
elevators. They were actually behind some partitions;
we might not have found them ... for several min-
utes.
     We climbed aboard, and Fly said in a normal
speaking voice, "Don't trust these elevators. May as
well start at the top and walk down, floor by floor,
familiarizing ourselves with the procedures. Then we
can report back to the President and tell him where
we'd do the most good."
     To me, he used hand signals: Start top; find radio;
broadcast report.
     The antenna was atop the roof, of course; but that
didn't mean that's where the radio room would be.
We wandered around every floor, trying to look
official. Early on, I found a clipboard hanging on a peg
in the rooftop janitor's shed, where they kept all the
window-washing stuff. Fly took the clipboard and
made a point of officiously writing down reports on
everybody in every office, with me trailing along
behind looking like his assistant.
     It worked; people tensed up, stopped talking,
worked diligently, and not a one confronted us to ask
us who the hell we were. It helped that Fly had been
inventory control officer for a few months. He stirred
them up and made them sweat.
     Finally, twelve floors down from the top, we found
the damned radio room. Two operators, both civil-
ians. One had a pistol; we were unarmed, of course.
Fly strode in like Gunnery Sergeant Goforth on the
inspection warpath. "On your feet," he barked; the
startled operators stared for a second, then leapt to
their feet and stood at a bad imitation of attention.
"Classified message traffic from the President," he
snarled. "Take a hike."
     "Sir, we're not supposed to--"
"Sir? Do you see these?" He angrily pointed at his
stripes. "Do I look like a God-damned pansy-waist
gut-sucking ass-kissing four-eyed college-boy officer to
you?"
     "No sir! No--ah--"
Fly leaned close, playing drill instructor. "Try
COR-POR-AL, boy. Next time you open that hole of
yours, first word out better be Corporal Taggart."
"C-C-Corporal Taggart, sir! I mean, Corporal
Taggart, we're not supposed to leave."
     "Did you hear what type of message traffic I said
this was?"
     "Classified? Sir--Corporal!--we're fully cleared
for all levels of classification."
     "Do I know that, boy? You got some paper you can
show me?"
     "No, not on me."
"Then take a hike, dickhead. Go back and get
something from your C.O. We'll wait right here."
The man dithered, looking back and forth at the
door, the equipment, and his partner, a small, frail-
looking man who pointedly looked away, saying No,
way, bud, this is your call. "All right. You won't touch
anything while I'm gone, will you?"
     "Scout's honor," sneered Fly. Was he ever a Boy
Scout? I couldn't remember.
     The man slid sideways past Fly and almost backed
into me. I glared daggers at him and he split. After a
couple of seconds Fly turned to the mousy compan-
ion. "What're you still doing here? Get after your
partner!"
     Meekly, the man turned and darted out of the
room.
     "Fly, what's going to happen when they get across
the street and find out there's no message traffic from
the President?"
     "Well, we'd better hurry, A.S., so we're done before
they get back!"
     Fortunately, they'd left the equipment on, because I
had no idea how to turn it on. It was some new,
ultramodern civilian stuff I'd never seen before. I
found a keypad next to a small LED display. At the
moment, it showed the frequency for Guard channel,
plus another freak above that.
     I tapped at the keypad; they hadn't locked it out,
thank God. I typed the freak for North Marine Corps
Air Base, office of the SubCincMarsCom, Colonel
George Karapetian. It was no great trick remember-
ing it; I was the radioman for Major Boyd when we
were stationed on Deimos on TDS to the Navy.
I wandered all over the band from one side to the
other, looking for the carrier. Finally, I found it; it
was weak and intermittent, as if the repeaters were
blown and I was picking up the source itself. But I
boosted the gain, and we were able to pick out the
words from behind the snow.
     I engaged the standard CD encrypter, digitally
adding the signal to a CD of random noise from
background radiation; they had an identical disk at
North--if we were lucky, they'd figure out that the
signal was scrambled and pull their encryption on-
line.
     "Corporal Fly Taggart, commanding officer of Fox
Company, Fourth Battalion, 223rd Light Drop Divi-
sion, to SubCincMarsCom, come in, Colonel
     Karapetian."
Fly broadcast the message over and over, and I
started to get nervous . . . both about the time and
about the lack of response. Finally, a voice sputtered
into life on the line. I recognized it; it was the colonel
himself, not some enlisted puke.
     "Fox, connect me to Lieutenant Weems. Fourth
Battalion, over."
     "Fourth Battalion, Weems is dead; I am in com-
mand of Fox."
     "Who is this?"
"Corporal Taggart, sir."
     "Corporal, give me a full report. Over."
Fly gave the colonel the verbal cook's tour of
everything that had happened to us in the past few
weeks. When he finished, Karapetian was quiet for so
long, I thought we'd lost the carrier.
     "I understand," he said. "Now where the hell are
you? Can you get back here, like yesterday?"
"We're at a resistance center in Salt Lake City," Fly
said. Suddenly, I got an uneasy feeling in my stomach;
should we be spilling this much intel, even to the sub-
Commander in Chief of the Mars Command?
     "Use rail transport," ordered Karapetian. "Get
your butts to Pendleton as fast as you can. We've got
to talk face-to-face about this. Got that, Corporal?"
"Aye, sir."
     "Good. Then I'll expect you tomorrow at--"
With a loud thunk, the entire system died. All the
dials, all the diodes, all the cool flashing lights.
I looked over my shoulder; Albert towered over us,
his face set in a mask of concrete. On one side stood
our friendly guard from the entrance; on the other
was the radio tech Fly had bullied, holding a remote-
control power switch in his hands.
     I gasped; framed in the light, Albert looked like he
had a halo.
     "I'm afraid you're going to have to come with me,"
Albert said.
     "Where?" I asked.
"To the President. Only he can decide cases of high
treason against the Army of God and Man United."
10
     With a heavy heart, I brought our two mis-
creant warriors to the President of the Twelve. I tried
to keep angry thoughts from my mind; judgment and
vengeance are the Lord's prerogatives, not ours.
Besides, I genuinely liked Fly Taggart, and I even
believed his wild story about fighting the alien de-
mons on Phobos and Deimos. And Miss Sanders,
now . . .
     No, that's wrong. I had no right; I didn't even know
her.
     I brought them into the chamber of justice to find
the President and his mast already seated. He wore a
suit; I sighed a hearty prayer of thanksgiving to the
Lord that this was to be mast, not a court-martial; the
President would have worn his robe for the latter.
"Sit," I commanded, putting a heavy hand on each
prisoner's shoulder and pushing him into the waiting
chair.
     "Who speaks for the outsiders?" asked Bishop
Wilston. He was a stickler for legalities.
     "They can speak for themselves," said the Presi-
dent, "this isn't a formal trial. I just want to find out
what the devil happened--and to find out whether
the devil himself was responsible."
     "Or just the imp of stupidity," I said. The President
glared at me; but I learned my manners under his
predecessor, who would listen to even the youngest
child with a mind to speak. This new fellow was from
out of state and a personal mentor of our old Presi-
dent, may he rest in peace.
     "You're rude," said the President, "but you may be
right. Corporal Taggart, as the responsible NCO, what
on Earth possessed you to start broadcasting all over
the globe from our radio room?"
     "Well, um . . ." Fly looked distinctly pink. "It
seemed like a good idea at the time."
     "Why are you so flipping surprised?" demanded
the woman. "Why shouldn't we report to our C.O.?
We just got back from a mission. What the hell did
you expect?"
     For a moment I thought the President was going to
burst a blood vessel. We all turned in annoyance to
Fly; couldn't he control his woman? His team
member?
     He was not a stupid man; he spoke up quickly:
"Arlene is tired, upset--you know how women get."
Now it was Arlene's turn to turn angry-red, opening
and closing her mouth like she wanted to say some-
thing devastating but couldn't even find the words.
Wisely, she pressed her lips together and said nothing.
A soft answer turneth away wrath, says the proverb;
or again, Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is
counted wise. The President was mollified and chose
to take the question seriously.
     "Miss Sanders--"
"Private Sanders, if you will," she said, voice
betraying the seething emotion within. Her red hair
flamed like a burning house, setting off her green eyes.
"Private Sanders, the 'why' is because the entire
military structure of the erstwhile United States, from
top to bottom, has been co-opted by the demons. Our
former government has capitulated . . , they surren-
dered, to put it bluntly, two weeks ago."
     "Oh, really! Maybe everybody but the Marines.
Semper fidel--"
     "Even the Marines," said the President softly. The
sudden change from loud and angry to quiet and cold
lent him an air of authority, as was befitting. I must
admit, the man had the mark of divine awe; the Lord
definitely moved through the President, when he let
Him.
     "Do you two know what you've done?" asked the
bishop. "Even the broadcast itself might have been
traced. But to actually tell the forces of darkness
where we are . . . ! That passes understanding."
"Look, maybe I shouldn't have done that. But they
must already have known this was a pocket of resist-
ance."
     Don't dig yourself a deeper grave, Fly, I thought
urgently. Outwardly, I kept my face impassive; no
need to draw the judges' attention to the attempt at
blame-shifting.
     "But Corporal," said the President, voice at its
quietest and most dangerous, "they did not know that
you were here. If you still maintain that you and
your--your comrade aborted the division invading
through Deimos, don't you think you might have
incurred a special wrath, a wrath now transferred to
us? Perhaps they consider you Demonic Enemy Num-
ber One. Did that cross your mind?"
     Fly remained silent. Good man. So did Arlene.
I stared at the woman; she was not at all bad-
looking, not what I would expect of a female Marine.
I had never served with one in my three years of active
duty service; she looked tough, but not like an Ameri-
can Gladiator.
     In fact, the swell of her breasts and hips was quite
womanly; she would be a sturdy woman, well able to
bear many children and face the rigors of life under
siege. I could almost see her standing in a doorway,
babe in arms ... or lying bare on the bed, awaiting
me--
     Ow! My conscience hammered on my head. What
are you DOING, you godless sinner! Here I was, in the
presence of the representative of Jesus Christ Himself,
and I was mentally undressing this woman!
     Get thee behind me, Satan: thou art an offense to
me: for thou savorest not the things that be of
God, but those that be of men.
     I concentrated on verses from the Bible and the
Book of Mormon, mentally reciting them so quickly I
lost all track of the trial and Miss Sanders.
When I blinked back, Fly and Arlene looked chas-
tened, humble. They clearly repented of their foolish
act and had found their way back to friendship with
God. Pride and Arrogance were banished--well, for
the moment.
     The President sighed heavily. "Go and be stupid no
more. And prepare for an attack, for surely one
arrives within an hour or two." He nodded to the
bishop, who, as General of the Armies of the Lord,
had primary responsibility for readying our defenses.
I already knew my station: Jerry and I manned the
dike west of the city, along with two thousand other
stalwarts.
     I had an idea. "Mr. President," I called. He turned
back, pausing at the door. "Sir, I'd like to suggest that
Taggart and Sanders be assigned to the defense along-
side me."
     He stared at me, and I squirmed. "Any particular
reason? They've already had their chance and
botched it."
     "That, sir, is the reason. Let them atone for their
mistake. They may have cost the lives of righteous
men; let them at least stand beside those men and put
their own lives on the line. Let them be at peace."
I glanced at Fly and Miss Sanders, and was tremen-
dously relieved to see a grateful look on their faces. I
was right about them: stupid, maybe; but they had
honor, and they probably felt like children whose
rough play accidentally killed the pet dog. I sure
would.
     The President was a hard man; but he was a just
man--else the Lord would not have allowed him to
serve as President of the Twelve; the Father has His
ways of making His pleasure known. He shook his
head, but said, "I think you're too forgiving a man,
Albert; but you know them better than I ever could.
Take them, if your C.O. approves."
     The bishop was smiling, though not in a friendly
way. "He'll approve," he prophesied.
     Less than half an hour later we were at the line. I
took care to see that both Fly and Miss Sanders were
armed, so they would know we still extended our
trust. It was part of the healing process. And the
President's prophecy came true, albeit a little late: in
fact, it took the forces of darkness two hours to mass
and attack, not one.
     Squinting into the distance, I saw first a column of
dust at the ragged edge of vision. We watched for
several minutes before even hearing the sound; you
can see a long, long way in the Utah desert, where ten
miles seems like one. The dust came from a column of
Bradley Fighting Vehicles, the same type in which I
had trained as a gunner before going to sniper school.
Thank the Lord they hadn't yet had time to scrounge
any M-2 tanks!
     As they roared up, we surprised them: the antitank
batteries opened up at two klicks. In the still air, the
artillery captains had the eyes of angels; they dropped
the first load of ordnance directly on the advancing
line. The laser spotter-scopes helped.
     Once the troops knew they were not up against
cowed, frightened refugees, they separated and ad-
vanced while evading. I took a risk, standing atop the
dike and focusing through binoculars mounted on a
pole. It was the BATF in the vanguard, as usual,
backed up by FBI shock troops. Reporting the battle
order over my encrypted radio, I saw the gold flag of
the IRS and realized we would doubtless have to face
flamethrowers and chemical-biological warfare shells.
The bastards. Regular Army filled in the gaps and
supplied most of the grunts--cannon fodder, as we
called them.
     They brought a contingent of brownies and bapho-
mets, but no molochs, praise God. Probably didn't
have any nearby. But I'd bet my last bullet there'd be
molochs and shelobs aplenty before the week was out.
There were a few of the unclean undead, but most
of the soldiers, horribly enough, appeared to be living
allies of the demons. I hoped to spare Fly that
knowledge, that our own species would willingly
cooperate in the subjugation of men to demons from
another star; but maybe it was better he find out now.
I guess he realized how wrong he was . . . but it was
a horrible way to find out.
     Contact was established a quarter hour later, on the
north side of Salt Lake City. Within a few minutes
battle was joined in my quadrant as well.
     Fly and Arlene acquitted themselves admirably;
they were no cowards! I especially enjoyed watching
the girl in combat, too busy and scared even to worry
whether my interest was righteous or sinful. She loped
forward to the out perimeter and spotted for the
mortars; my heart was in my throat--if they spotted
her, that beautiful body would be blown to tiny pieces
in seconds.
     Bombs and shells exploded left and right, but our
positions were secure; except for the occasional lucky
shot, the evil ones hit only stragglers. But I was very
glad for my earplugs; Fly had refused a pair, but
Arlene took them.
     We threw back the initial blitzkrieg; the demons
simply weren't prepared for that savage a level of
resistance. They'd probably never encountered it be-
fore. Like the heroic Jews of the Warsaw Ghetto, who
stood up to the Nazi butchers, without despair, we
forced the bastards back and back, until at last they
withdrew and formed a circle around our force, three
klicks back--out of range, they thought.
     After two more hours passed without movement,
Arlene and Fly took a chance and returned to me.
They looked shaken. I wanted to put my arm
     around Corporal Taggart, cheer him up; how could he
have known? But the gesture would not have been
appreciated. He stepped across the dead bodies of
righteous men to come to me; he knew what he had
done, and the last soul to forgive him would be
himself. He would probably carry guilt to his grave,
unless he found a minister to unburden himself.
I had the vague thought that he was a Catholic. I
would never condone such a perversion of the teach-
ings of Christ--in normal times; but in this world,
even to call oneself a Christian is a courageous step. I
hoped he would find a priest and confess; otherwise,
he might never give himself absolution.
     "We seemed to have scored a temporary stale-
mate," he said, sounding defeated.
     "We kicked ass!" argued Arlene.
"You're both right," I said, ever the diplomat.
"But how long can we hold out?" asked Fly. "A few
days? A week? Two weeks? Eventually they'll get
reinforcements and overrun us." He didn't add and
all because of me, but I could tell he thought it.
"Eventually," I agreed. "In about five or six years."
"Years? What the hell do you mean?"
     I winked. "We've been preparing for this sort of war
for a long time, my friend ... we just never realized
we'd be fighting literal demons!"
     "Jesus . . . who were you expecting to fight?"
The blasphemy angered me, but I let it slide. He
was an unbeliever and might not even realize what
he'd said. "Exactly who we are fighting; the forces of
Mammon. We'd hoped to avert the crisis by engaging
in the world, steering it toward the righteousness of
the Constitution ordained by God Himself in 1787.
We sent our members out into the world, joined the
Army, the FBI, the Washington power structure. We
increased our numbers within the IRS and even
within NASA. But in the end, all that effort bought us
only advance warning and some spies and saboteurs
within the enemy ranks."
     Fly shook his head, dazed. He said nothing.
"Now we are the last stronghold in the continental
United States. There is but one major enclave left on
the planet for humans and the godly; there centers the
Resistance."
     "Where?"
I chuckled. "Even if I knew, Fly, I wouldn't tell
you. Your interest rate on keeping secrets isn't very
high right now."
     He smiled sardonically. "I guess I wouldn't tell you
either, if you'd just done what we did. What / did."
"We," corrected Arlene. "You were right the first
time. I stood right beside you and helped you report
to Karapetian."
     He shrugged, neither confirming nor denying.
"Are there plans to get to the Resistance?"
     "If there are, we haven't executed them yet. We can
send brief messages--too quick to triangulate or
decrypt. But we can't send people."
     "Why not?"
"There is some sort of energy barrier that prevents
us from leaving the continent . . . and at times, even
from leaving an urban center. Los Angeles has one;
you cannot fly from L.A. to anywhere else unless the
demons drop the wall--which they do only for their
own, of course."
     "But if you go around the barrier?"
"We've tried; we can't find an edge. It seems to be
everywhere. What we need to do is find the source or
the control center and shut it off. At least long enough
to get our people out, join up with the Resistance.
Otherwise, eventually, we will fall; we have years
worth of food and medicine, but not decades worth.
And after a while they will mass enough troops
against us to overrun us in any case.
     "Worst-case scenario, you two, we lose this city
after a four-month siege. That's if they throw every-
thing in the world at us."
     "Are you kidding?" demanded an incredulous
Arlene. "What about missiles? Nuclear bombs
     dropped from airplanes?"
"Our agents were heavily involved in the Strategic
Defense Initiative . . . remember?" I winked. "And
we have anti-air defenses too. We're not worried
about nukes; we're more worried about tanks and
undead soldiers. None of our defenses were erected
with molochs in mind."
     "Molochs?"
"What you called steam-demons, I believe."
     Suddenly, the radio phone buzzed. The radioman
answered, listened for a moment, saying a string of
"yessirs." He turned to me. "Albert, the President
wants to see your charges."
     "Now?"
"Tonight. The captain says he has a mission for
them . . . something to prove themselves after their
incompetence ... no offense, guys; I'm just quoting."
"None taken," said Arlene, highly offended. My
eyes began to dwell longingly on her curves and swells
again, and I brutally forced my gaze to the dead and
wounded littering the battlefield . . . even their dead.
The corpsmen were already busy, collecting the casu-
alties for transportation to hospital.
     "Got a time?" I asked.
"Eighteen hundred," said the radioman. I didn't
know his name, even though he knew mine; it made
me uncomfortable.
     I nodded. "Okay, you heard the man. Fly, Arlene,
start polishing your brass. We've got three hours
before your mission briefing. And guys?"
     They waited expectantly.
"Try not to hose it up. This time."
     Arlene Sanders flipped me the finger; but Fly just
looked down at his boots, brushing the mud off with
his hands.
     11
Arlene, Albert, and I sat in our little room
like old friends. "Albert, you were right," I said. "We
should have asked you before charging off to report to
Karapetian."
     "The fact that you had to sneak around and concoct
an absurd fairy tale should have told you something,"
he said, smiling faintly. I caught Arlene looking at
him with an interest I hadn't seen in her eyes since she
first began getting close to old Dodd. Could she . . . ?
Nah; that was a silly thought. Not with how she felt
about religion in general--and Mormons in particu-
lar. Not after her brother.
     She spoke, her voice tight and controlled. "Albert,
can you tell us what on Earth happened? I mean here
on Earth."
     "Gladly," said Albert.
Evidently, even with only half an invasion force,
the urban areas of Earth had fallen quickly. Albert
suspected that high-ranking U.S. government officials
and their counterparts in other governments, the
federal and state agencies and even the services
themselves--the U.S. Marine Corps!--actually col-
laborated with the aliens.
     I guess there wasn't much argument I could make
. . . not after seeing living human beings on the march
against us in the siege. If I cared to climb up to the
roof, I could see them still. I didn't care to.
The monsters promised a peaceful occupation and
promised each collaborator that his own government
would be given the top command slot. A tried and
true approach, with plenty of terrestrial examples: it
worked for Hitler and Stalin; now it worked for a
bunch of plug-uglies from beyond the planets.
Naturally, the aliens screwed the traitors, killing
hundreds of millions . . . utterly destroying Washing-
ton, D.C., and demolishing much of New York, Paris,
Moscow, and Beijing. The Mormons knew the invad-
ers were really serious when all the stock exchanges
were wiped out in two hours.
     "They control all the big cities now," Albert re-
ported.
     "So at least some things will feel the same," said
Arlene. Our newfound friend laughed uproariously.
He was taking to Arlene's morbid brand of humor.
"What's the Resistance like?" she asked, hanging
on his every word. I started to resent her interest.
Maybe I was only her "big brother," but shouldn't
that count for something?
     Albert turned up his hands. "How should I know?
We know only that they exist, and they have a lot of
science types, teenies. They're working on stuff all the
time . . . but so far, they haven't been able to shut off
the energy wall from outside--and the only way to get
to it from the inside is to mount an assault ... or
infiltrate."
     "Maybe that's what the President wants us to do," I
speculated; I don't think Albert had any more idea
than I, though.
     Jerry joined us again; now he too was in a dark suit,
though still heavily armed with a Browning Automat-
ic Rifle. It reminded me of a "Family" war between
Mafia soldiers I began to feel distinctly underdressed.
"What about the countryside?" I asked.
     Albert nodded and answered: "That's the local
resistance, such as it is. At least we are not alone. For a
little longer, at least."
     Jerry volunteered a comment: "They seem more
interested in taking slaves from the rural areas than
conquering the territory."
     Albert concurred: "It gives us a fighting chance,
they being so slow expanding their pale."
     "What is this 'special wisdom' the President offered
to share before the attack?" I asked. "Can you give us
a hint?"
     Albert and Jerry exchanged the look of comrades in
arms. "Don't worry about it," said Albert. "He's less
worried about what you know than what you see."
Albert insisted that Arlene and I rest and bathe.
The only choice offered was a cold shower, but that
was fine with us. We found clean clothes.
     Then we got the "fifty-cent-tour" from Albert, the
tour that wouldn't get him in trouble.
     Albert took us down to the hidden catacombs
they'd constructed beneath the Tabernacle complex.
The trip began with an elevator ride. The metal was
shiny and new. Everything was air-conditioned. The
doors slid open to reveal something out of the latest
James Bond movie. But somehow I was not surprised
at the vast complex they had constructed. We walked
under a gigantic V arch to bear witness to dozens of
miles of secret shelters. We were not taken behind the
locked doors to see the contents, but Albert told us
they had millions of rounds of ammunition, stores,
heavy military equipment, a whole factory, and more.
It was survivalist heaven.
     "I wonder what kind of heavy equipment?" Arlene
whispered in my ear.
     "Tanks and Humvees," I whispered back. "The rest
when he trusts us."
     "I'm sure he'll trust us plenty after we've died for
the cause," she concluded.
     "Can't hardly blame him." I could kick myself for
such self-pity, but I couldn't get my stupidity out of
my mind.
     We took a turn in the passageway and reached
another elevator marked for five more levels down.
"Jesus!" said Arlene, followed by: "Sorry, Albert."
He only shook his head. Even Albert was probably
cutting her some slack for being female. Arlene could
always sense a patronizing attitude, but she had too
much class to throw it back at someone working so
hard to play fair with her.
     "Why would you have all this?" she asked.
He didn't hesitate in answering, "To equalize our
relations with the IRS."
     "Man, all I had was Melrose Larry Green, CPA,"
marveled Arlene.
     "I'll let both of you in on something," he said,
"because it hardly matters today. All you saw today
were ground troops; but did you know the IRS had its
own 'Delta Force,' the Special Revenue Collection
Division?"
     We shook our heads, but once again I wasn't really
surprised. "In case of another Whiskey Rebellion?" I
guessed.
     "An interesting way of putting it," he said, and
continued: "They had an infantry division, two ar-
mored cav regiments, a hidden fast-attack submarine,
a heavy bomber wing, and from what I hear, a carrier
battle group."
     Somebody whistled. It was Yours Truly. If the
Mormons knew about that, could they have wound up
with some of it? This was an obvious thought, and
would make full use of an installation this size; but I
wasn't going to ask. Arlene and I were lucky to be
learning this much.
     "How'd they finance it?" I asked.
"The IRS can finance anything?" suggested Arlene,
as if a student in school.
     "Well, even they had to cover their tracks," said
Albert. "Jerry thinks they hid the military buildup
inside the fictitious budget deficit. Unfortunately, the
Special Revenue Collection Division was seized by
the demons."
     "Aliens," Arlene corrected, almost unconsciously.
"Whatever."
     This seemed a good moment to clear up the nomen-
clature: "Actually, Albert, we named the different
kinds of aliens to keep them separate. We call the
dumb pink ones the demons."
     "How did the aliens get their claws on all that IRS
equipment?" Arlene asked.
     "Hm. Because Internal Revenue was the very first
group to sell out Earth," he answered. This was
definitely not a day of surprises.
     "Do we get to ride on the other elevator?" I asked.
"Later," he said. "And I'm sorry I can't show you
behind the doors."
     "No, you've been great, Albert," said Arlene. I
could tell she was impressed for real, no joke. This
was rare. "Why don't you tell us about your checkered
military past?"
     "That's next on the agenda," he said, "and the
President will want to brief you on the mission, if he's
picked it yet."
     We took the elevator back up to face the boss. I
promised myself that no matter how much I wanted
to do it, I wouldn't say, "Howdy, pardner."
     Three more bodyguards surrounded the President.
These guys didn't seem friendly like Albert or Jerry.
He led us to the auxiliary command center (I sup-
posed the real command center was at the bottom
level of the complex), where we learned that the
nearest nerve center of the alien invasion was Los
Angeles. The monsters had set up their ultra-
advanced computer services and war technology cen-
ter near the HOLLYWOOD sign. I didn't want to ask who
sold out humanity there. I was afraid to find out.
The President didn't waste time coming to the
point: "Two highly trained Marines who fought the
enemy to a standstill in space, then floated down out
of orbit, would be better qualified to lead a certain
mission we have in mind than our own people. This is
assuming that we haven't been subject to a certain
degree of exaggeration. A man and a woman alone
could only be expected to do so much against hun-
dreds of the enemy."
     Arlene was behaving herself, but it dawned on me
that I hadn't made any promises to keep my mouth
shut. This wasn't about religion. This was about
doubting our word after we'd swum through a world
of hurt to get this far.
     I reminded myself that we needed this man; I
reminded myself we'd already hosed the job . . . but
stupidity had nothing to do with dishonor!
     "If the two of you could get to Los Angeles," the
leader continued, "and make it into the computer
system, download full specs on their most basic
technology, and get it back to the United States War
Technology Center, it would aid our defense immeas-
urably."
     "What's that?" I asked.
"The War Tech Center was created a few weeks ago,
hidden--west of here. You'll be told where when the
need arises. When you get the download."
     I thought for a moment. It couldn't be as far as
Japan or China; Beijing and Tokyo were both de-
stroyed. He must mean Hawaii.
     I couldn't resist being a smart-ass; the President
brought that out in people. "It's either Wheeler AFB,
Kaneohe Bay Marine Corps Air Station, or Barber's
Point Naval Air Station, all on Oahu," I declared.
"Do I win anything?"
     "I love Hawaii!" said Arlene. "Great weather.
Hardly any humidity."
     "But those prices," I answered.
It was a trivial little protest against the man's
pomposity and skepticism, but it made us feel a whole
lot better.
     "Please," said the President, his face turning posi-
tively florid. "As I was saying, if you can penetrate the
enemy stronghold and bring the specs to the U.S.
technology center, there are scientists there who can
do something with it. We have refugees from ARPA,
the Lockheed 'skunk works,' NASA, MacDAC, hack-
ers from many places." It sounded to me like the
President of the Twelve had been boning up on other
subjects besides theology . . . and finance. "Has Al-
bert told you about the force field?"
     "He said something about an energy wall."
"You have to find a way to shut it off. . . otherwise,
you're not going anywhere. You get offshore about
fifteen miles, then call an encrypted message in. We'll
vector you to the War Technology Center."
     ''If we can pull this off," said Arlene in her serious,
engineer's tone of voice, "and a computer expert can
dehack the alien technology, we might come up with
shields against them. Defenses, something."
     "The first problem is to crack Los Angeles," said
the President.
     "Then we're your best bet," I said. "After Phobos
and Deimos, how bad can L.A. be?" Even at the time,
this sounded like famous last words.
     "Yes, my point exactly," he agreed languidly, still
frosted; "how much simpler this would have to be
than the Deimos situation." He paused long enough
to annoy us again. "This is more than a two-man
operation." Translation: we needed keepers. Well,
that was all right with me. "You'll be infiltrating, so
we're not talking about a strike force here."
"Stealth mission," said Arlene.
     "Two more people would be about right," I said.
The President's first choice was excellent. Albert
wanted to go. "By way of apology for being the one to
turn you in," he said, holding out his big paw of a
hand. I took it gingerly; he hardly had anything to
apologize for. He winked.
     "If you'd been one fraction less of a hard-ass, I
wouldn't want you on this mission anyway."
     "This is probably a good time to tell you about
Albert's record," said the President. "He was a PFC
in the Marine Corps, I'm sure you'll be pleased to
hear. Honorably discharged. He won a medal for his
MOS." Military operational specialty.
     "Which was?" I asked Albert, eye-to-eye.
"A sniper, Corporal," he answered. "Bronze star,
Colombia campaign. Drug wars."
     "Sniper school?"
"Of course."
     "God bless." said Arlene.
Albert was fine; we both dug Albert. Couldn't say
the same about the second choice, who Nate ushered
into the ops room: she looked like a fourteen-year-old
girl in T-shirt, jeans, and dirty sneakers.
     "Fly," Arlene said, staring, "does my promise ap-
ply to bitching about personnel decisions?"
     "Say your piece."
She shook her head in incredulity. "I'd never
have expected this kind of crap from this bunch of
sexist--"
     "Uh, no offense," I mumbled to the President,
feeling pretty lame. My face flushed red-hot, as if I'd
just taken niacin.
     He chose to ignore the editorial. "I hate sending
her. Unfortunately, she's the best qualified."
Arlene stared at the girl, a foxy little item ready to
stare back. "I never thought I'd say these words,"
Arlene began, "but there's a first time for everything.
Honey--"
     "My name is Jill," she said defiantly.
"Okay, Jill. Listen closely. Please don't take offense,
but this is no job for a girl."
     "I have to go," she said. "Live with it."
"Honey, I don't want to die with it."
     "What's this joke?" I demanded.
"I told you. She's the best, uh, hacker, I think it is,
that we've got. But you deserve an explanation." He
turned to her and asked, "Do you mind if I tell
them?" She shrugged. He went on: "I apologize for
her sullen attitude."
     I don't know about Arlene, but I didn't see anything
sullen about the kid. The President never seemed to
look directly at her but kind of sideways.
     "Back in the life, before her family moved here and
accepted the faith, Jill was arrested twice for breaking
into computer systems. She served six months in a
juvenile detention center in Ojai; then her parents
joined the Church and moved here."
     All the time he was talking, he kept sneaking
glances out of the corner of his eye. He seemed to be
looking at the top of her head. She was pretending not
to be interested but hung on every word.
     "Jill was embarrassed and ashamed of her arrest
and conviction," the President said very slowly,
as if coaching, watching her all the time. "She was
locked up with a girl who was a prostitute and drug
dealer--"
     "She didn't want to be a junkie-hooker," said Jill,
speaking about herself in the third person.
     The President pretended not to hear. "She still
loves computers, but wants to be a security person
now." He took a breath, then concluded, "The aliens
killed her parents, and only missed her because she
was covered with blood and they assumed she was
dead. She was frightened by the aliens, of course--"
"I hate them," she piped in. "I want them all
dead."
     "Good girl," said Arlene, half won over.
The Mormon leader approached Jill but was careful
not to touch her. At least he finally looked at her.
"You don't like your former hacker buddies, do you?"
he asked.
     "I hate them."
"Why?"
     She was uncomfortable about talking but couldn't
keep the words from spilling out. "Because they don't
care about what happens to anyone else. They don't
give a rat's ass if they hack a hospital computer and
destroy a patient's records, by accident, or as a joke."
"Some joke," said Arlene.
     "They'd only be upset if they did a sloppy job," the
girl replied, her voice monotonous. "They suck."
"God bless you, Jill," said the President. "And you
know what the aliens are?"
     Jill sure did. "A million times worse. I've got to kill
them all."
     Mother Mary, a regular little parrot! Did the Presi-
dent write the script out for her? I wondered. Or was
she just adept at ad-libbing what he wanted to hear,
what would get her on the job?
     "Don't you think you should leave the killing to
Albert and this other man?" asked the President.
"That does it," said Arlene, hackles smacking the
ceiling.
     "I'm sorry, but there's no alternative to taking her
along," said the President.
     "That's not what I meant!" Arlene gave me her
special look. I sighed, but didn't shake my head or
give her the shut-up signal. I'd had about all of the
President I could take.
     "Mr. President," she began, speaking slowly as if to
a child--I realized we still didn't know his name--"I
respect your beliefs, even though I don't hold them
myself. But we are in a situation where every able-
bodied individual must do his or her best. There are
armed women outside."
     "Yes," he answered. "Adult women."
Arlene turned to Jill. "I apologize for doubting
you," she said. "I think you'll do fine." She glared
back at the President, who shook his head sadly.
I smiled, suddenly realizing we'd been had: he had
put on the whole "Mormon patriarch" act just to get
us to accept a little girl as a teammate! It was
masterful. . . and I didn't say a word to Arlene. Let
her keep her illusions.
     "If you succeed," concluded the President, "you
will have redeemed yourself thrice over."
     "And if we fail?"
"You'll be dead. Or undead. Either way, you'll
never have to think about your error again."
Gee. Thanks a lump.
     "What weapon do you have?" Arlene asked Jill.
The fourteen-year-old picked up a slim box from the
table; took me a moment to recognize it as a
CompMac "Big Punk" ultramicro with a radio-
     telemetry port. That was some nice equipment; did
she come with it, or did the President hijack it for
her?
     "You'll train her in the use of firearms," the Presi-
dent said, turned on his heel and walked away.
"I've fired guns before," said Jill.
     Arlene touched the girl on the shoulder. Jill didn't
pull away. Arlene didn't talk down to her. In a casual
tone she asked, "Do you think there might be some
pointers I could give you, hon?"
     The fourteen-year-old smiled for the first time. She
didn't answer right away. Then she said in a firm
voice, "Want some pizza?"
     Now that she mentioned it, my mouth began to
salivate.
     12
I took my cue from Arlene and reluctantly
     accepted the kid. The Mormon leader guaranteed the
girl's bona fides. Given the way he felt about the
female of the species, if he wanted Jill on this mission
that badly, that was good enough for me.
     "Welcome aboard," I said, approaching Jill and
putting out my hand. I didn't expect anything, but she
surprised me by shaking hands and smiling. Smart
kid. She knew when she'd won a victory.
     "Thanks." Jill sized each of us up, letting her glance
stay on me a little longer--not exactly pleased with
the effect, I noticed. "I won't let you down," she said
to all of us.
     "How do you know?" asked Albert, but he wasn't
being belligerent about it.
     "Yeah," said Jill, not losing a beat. "They talk that
way around here. I won't get anybody killed on
purpose."
     Arlene bent down and patted Jill on the head. The
girl didn't pull away, but acted surprised. Affection
was something new in her experience. I hoped she
would live long enough to experience a lot more of it.
But I didn't kid myself: once we entered Los Angeles,
the mission was everything, and we were all expend-
able. It had been that way since the first monster came
through the Gate on Phobos.
     "Come on," said Arlene, taking Jill by the hand.
"Your training starts now."
     Jerry had stayed with us after the boss sauntered
off. "There might not be time for that," he said. He
didn't say it as if he liked it. So far, the only person I'd
met who impressed me as something of a jerk was the
leader, and even he was no fool.
     Arlene kept her voice even and calm. "We'll make
time," she said. "Training is not a luxury."
Looking at the man's face, I could see that he didn't
like arguing with facts. He shrugged and didn't say
another word.
     "How about it, Albert?" I asked the other member
of our team. "What kind of time do we have?"
"Plenty," he said. "I've seen Jill shoot. She'll do
fine."
     "Do I get a gun of my own?" asked Jill.
"Does she?" Arlene asked Albert.
     "Sure as shootin'," he said, letting a moment pass
before we responded to his wordplay. He enjoyed the
double take.
     We went to an aboveground arsenal. Seeing what
they kept up top made me more anxious to see behind
those doors downstairs. As it was, they wouldn't
notice the absence of Jill's weapon of choice, though it
was a little strange seeing the fourteen-year-old hold-
ing an AR-19 like she was used to it.
     Jill noticed my expression. "We need all the fire-
power we can get," she said.
     "You're right. Let's see what you can do with it."
And thank God she didn't have her heart set on an
AK-47. The kick would knock her on her butt. At
least the AR-19 was a small enough caliber.
     There were plenty of places to shoot. We went to a
makeshift range where someone had gotten hold of
old monster movie posters. Jill chose one already
pretty badly shot up: a horns-and-tail demon from an
old British movie. It looked a lot like a hell-prince.
One of the horns was shot out, but the other was still
intact.
     "I'll take the bone on his head," she announced.
She missed with the first burst, pulling up and to the
right; but she nearly shredded the target anyway.
Arlene went over and whispered something in her
ear. Jill smiled and tried again. This time the bursts
were shorter and stayed on target. The demon's
second horn was history.
     "What did you tell her?" I asked Arlene. I always
appreciate a few well-chosen words.
     "Girl talk," she said, arching her dark eyebrows.
"Kind of a shame to destroy these collector's
items," I observed when we ran out of ammo.
     "No problem," said Albert. "We have hundreds of
these. The President used to visit the church in
Hollywood, and we have a lot of contacts."
     "How did I do?" asked Jill, bringing us back to the
original point of the exercise.
     "I thought I'd need to teach you something," said
Arlene. "Guess you're mostly ready. Mostly." The
day was shaping up nicely. We could do a whole lot
worse than Jill.
     I was still in a good mood when we had dinner with
the President that night. They set a good table, and he
boasted how they could keep this up for a long time.
After dinner, Jill toddled off to bed in the female-
teens quarter. Albert wanted to spend time with an
older woman we'd been informed was an aunt, and I
managed to get Arlene alone in the presidential
garden.
     Although night had fallen, the security lights in the
garden were bright, thanks to the generators of our
hosts. I saw Arlene frowning in thought. "Albert may
have an extra mission," she said, "scouting out new
converts for the Church."
     I laughed. "Hey, don't make it sound so sinister. We
should ask any survivors to join us, male or female."
"Unless they've gone insane," she said, "and there
are parts of Los Angeles where it would be difficult to
know."
     "Well, I'm glad we have Albert and Jill with us."
She brightened. "Me too. That young lady im-
presses the hell out of me. Maybe she's lucky to be
going off with us to face demons and imps."
     Arlene never lost her ability to surprise me.
"Lucky?" I echoed. "Why do you say that?"
     "She's past puberty, Fly. They'd probably marry
her off to one of these ..." She didn't finish.
I recognized that the conversation was on the
slippery slope to more trouble than a barrel of pump-
kins. Arlene's prejudice against anything and every-
thing religious, and especially against Mormons, was
disturbing; the people in this compound, Mormons
and others alike, had done nothing to warrant such
anger. Time for a strategic retreat. "So, what do you
think of the President?"
     "What do you think?" she threw it back at me.
"Well, as I've said before, you don't have to like
someone in power to recognize that you need cooper-
ation from the boss. This man is no fool; he's playing
his own game."
     Arlene shook her head, but it wasn't because she
disagreed with me. "I always understand a leader,"
she said. "It's the followers who confuse me. This
man is a master of transferring authority. His follow-
ers won't argue with someone who says he gets his
marching orders direct from God."
     "Yeah, but in the war we're about to fight, let's hope
God really is on our side. Or we're on God's side, I
mean."
     She took a stick of gum out of her pocket, popped
the contents in her mouth, and gave forth with her
considered opinion: "Agreed. Any god, any goddess,
anything to give us an edge is fine by me."
     I ignored the blasphemy. Honestly, she does it just
to needle me. "Where did you get the gum?" I asked.
"Jill," she said between chews. "Want a stick?"
"No thanks." Gum is not one of my vices. But I was
impressed with how quickly Arlene had been won
over.
     We went back in the compound, expecting to return
to the room we'd been in before. A matronly woman
we hadn't seen before greeted us. "Hello, my name is
Marie," she said. "I'm here to show the young woman
to the female quarters."
     Arlene and I exchanged knowing glances. I think we
both did a commendable job of not bursting out
laughing. I couldn't remember the last time I'd slept
without Arlene taking watch. We'd already been
through the sexual-tension zone and popped out the
other end with the understanding that we were bud-
dies, pals, comrades.
     But now we were back in the Adam and Eve
department. The only question that really mattered
was, did we trust these guys to keep us alive while we
slept? The fact that they were still here was pretty
good evidence.
     "What kind of security do you have here?" I asked
the woman.
     She didn't understand. "Good enough to keep you
out of the henhouse," she answered with a slight
smirk.
     I rolled my eyes. That wasn't what I meant, but--
ah, skip it.
     "See you in the morning," I said to Arlene.
For the first time in a long time, I was alone. Maybe
the President still had doubts about me, but they put
me on a long leash.
     Suddenly I realized I didn't know where I was
supposed to sleep. The room we'd been in before
made sense. We'd been allowed to use it when we
freshened up, but we were under guard then. I wished
I'd thought to ask the woman if that was where I was
supposed to go.
     I didn't know anyone in the hallways, but they
didn't pay any attention to me as I went past; they
weren't afraid . . . what a strange concept that had
become. I could have asked them about a men's
quarters, but I wasn't in a rush to have the old YMCA
experience if I could avoid it. If I wasn't going to bunk
with Arlene, then I wanted to be alone.
     Privacy suddenly exerted a strong appeal: to be
alone without a hell-prince stomping on my face, to
sleep without worry of a zombie who used to be a
friend cuddling up next to me and sharing the rot of
the grave, just to enjoy silence and solitude, without
spinys fudging it up. Yeah, the more I thought of it,
the better I liked it.
     I retraced my way back to the room. After the
corridors on Deimos, this was almost too easy. The
door wasn't locked. Then I noticed that the lock had
been removed. Now that I thought about it, there
were no locks anywhere. But the room was empty,
gloriously empty, and that was good enough.
     I went in, closed the door, flipped on the light.
There was a miracle. The light came on. No conserva-
tion or blackout measures in this small, windowless
room. Which meant I could do something more
     important than sleeping.
The book was where I'd left it. Normally, the Book
of Mormon would not be my first choice of reading
material; the sisters would not approve. Under the
circumstances, I was grateful to have it.
     I started at the beginning, with the testimonies of
the witnesses and the testimony of the Prophet Joseph
Smith. This told the story of the finding of the gold
plates with the Holy Book written thereon. Reminded
me of the old joke about the founding of the Unitari-
an Church: a prophet found gold plates on which was
written . . . absolutely nothing!
     As I read, I remembered an old Hollywood movie
about Joseph Smith and Brigham Young, founders of
the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day Saints.
Hollywood . . . where we would be going. Hollywood
was in the hands of the monsters. Vincent Price
starred in the Mormon movie and also in a million
monster movies. I was sure this all meant something.
I started the first book, made it to the second and
the third; and kept reading until I reached Chapter
Five in the Book of Alma, Verse 59:
     For what shepherd is there among you having
many sheep doth not watch over them, that the
wolves enter not and devour his flock? And
     behold, if a wolf enter his flock doth he not
drive him out? Yea, and at the last, if he can, he
will destroy him.
     That seemed like a good place to stop because I
doubted I would find a more agreeable sentiment
anywhere else in the Mormon scriptures.
     13
Did you sleep well?" Arlene asked, winking.
     "Not bad," I said. "I think it's the first night I
didn't dream about monsters."
     The sun was up, the sky was clear, and for a
moment it was possible to believe that none of this
had ever happened. A dog ran by, a healthy mutt that
someone was feeding--not a sign of impending star-
vation, but perhaps an overgenerous use of resources.
"Guess what?" she said with an impish smile. "I
didn't dream about monsters either. But I did
dream."
     Teasing was simply not Arlene's style. She really
surprised me. "Maybe that's why they segregate the
boys and the girls," I said. "To make everyone think
about it."
     "We can't keep any secrets from you," said Albert,
joining us outside the main cafeteria.
     "Except the ones that count," I replied, not alto-
gether innocently. I was still thinking about secrets
and closed doors, and an unknown, upcoming mis-
sion.
     "Where's Jill?" asked Arlene.
"Already inside, having breakfast," he said. "We
should join her. Afterward, we'll receive our briefing."
It had been a long, long time since I'd eaten
pancakes, with real maple syrup yet. I didn't think I'd
be able to get coffee in Salt Lake City, but there was
plenty of it for those with the morning caffeine
monkey on their back. This was a pretty trivial
monster in the grand scheme of things.
     And then we got down to business. We returned to
the ops room from the day before. The President was
waiting for us dressed in a conservative black suit. He
could've passed as an undertaker, not the most inspir-
ing image to send us off to California.
     "The entire state of California is in enemy hands,"
he said, then led us over to a map of the relevant
states. Red lines marked all the existing train tracks.
"There used to be a high speed train between L.A. and
Salt Lake City. We destroyed the train to prevent the
aliens from sending us a cargo of themselves. I refuse
to refer to those creatures as soldiers. We also thought
the train might be used to send us an atomic bomb."
"Would they even know how to use the trains?"
asked Arlene.
     "You fought them, didn't you? They can use any-
thing we can. Machinery is machinery. It offends me
how they used our own, God-given atomic weapons
against us. We are fortunate the radiation and poisons
have not contaminated this area. God has inter-
vened." Atomic, not nuclear; an interesting word
choice.
     "We'll be going into radiation?" asked Jill. She had
not thought of this until now.
     "You'll be entering undestroyed areas, and our
scientists tell us that the invaders have neutralized
much of the fallout in the areas they control."
Arlene interrupted, as usual. "When we fought
them on Phobos and Deimos, they were comfortable
with higher radiation levels than a human being; but
that doesn't mean they could survive H-bomb
     fallout."
For a moment I thought the President was going to
bite her head off, but then he controlled his temper.
"We have antiradiation pills for you to take and wrist
bands that will glow red if you get a near-lethal dose.
In addition, you'll have some protective gear if you
require it. And any weapons you can bear, of course."
"How do we get to L.A.?" I asked.
     "Take the train," answered Albert.
"Great. How do we get to the tracks? I thought they
were all ripped up."
     "Not all the track was destroyed," said the Presi-
dent. "You can take one of our Humvees south,
following the railroad track to a good spot for getting
aboard the train." Getting aboard. . . How easily he
breezed over that slight difficulty!
     And another small difficulty. "Um . . . the aliens
are going to let us drive right out in a Humvee?"
Albert snorted. The President glowered at him,
then returned to the question. "Of course not. You'll
leave here and pass underneath enemy lines. The
Humvee is hidden in a safe location--Albert knows
where it is."
     "I do?"
"Where you hid after blowing the tracks three
weeks ago."
     "Ah." Albert nodded, remembering the spot. Well,
that made one of us.
     "Underneath the aliens," I asked, "you have a
tunnel?"
     "It's always wise to build in a way to expedite
escape," said Albert. "All our safe houses use them--
including this facility. Usually exit from a basement,
dive down thirty or forty feet, then continue a long
way, miles perhaps."
     "How did you build all that without anyone
knowing?"
     "We had a lot of time on our hands." He grinned.
"And a lot of members in street maintenance posi-
tions."
     "You must ride the train into Phoenix," continued
the President, producing a pointer and stabbing
Phoenix.
     "Why Phoenix?" asked Arlene.
"The train that goes from Phoenix into L.A. can't
be stopped and can't be boarded; Phoenix is under
demonic possession. If you stow away before Phoenix
and escape detection, you might not be boarded.
Then it's smooth riding all the way into L.A." He put
down the pointer with a flourish.
     Jill laughed. She sounded a lot older than she was,
listening to the scorn in her laugh; it suggested a
lifetime of frustration.
     The President did not act as defensive as I would
have expected. "I know it's a long shot," he said. "I'm
open to any better suggestions."
     "I wish I had one," said Albert.
I expected Jill to launch into a tirade, but instead
she kept her mouth taped.
     "The plan sounds workable to me," I said. "Every-
thing is a long shot from now on."
     At no point had anyone talked about who would
lead this mission; I suspected the President would
want his own man in charge, and I prepared myself
for an argument.
     Then Albert surprised me: "Corporal Taggart is in
charge, of course." He surprised the President too,
who started to object, then bit off whatever he'd been
about to say. Leadership was clearly already deter-
mined.
     The President allowed us to pick our own weapons:
a double-barreled scattergun for me, and a .41 caliber
hunting rifle with a scope for long-range work. Arlene
was back to her perennial AB-10 machine pistol and a
scoped .30-30. Albert surprised me by picking some
foreign-made Uzi clone I'd never seen before; I didn't
think a Marine would go in for that kind of flash. But
1 guess it wasn't really different from Arlene's AB-10,
though a bit bigger; and even that might give it more
stability in a firefight. Albert said he would just use
Arlene's .30-30 for any sniping . . . and Jill already
had her AR-19, of course.
     We also took pistols, ammo, grenades, day-to-night
goggles--we had to be careful to conserve the battery
power, using them only when absolutely necessary; no
recharges--and one of the more exotic energy weap-
ons I never liked; not a BFG, which they'd never
heard of, but a gas-plasma pulse rifle. We packed food
and blankets and other useful items, including a
complement of mountaineering (or wall-scaling)
equipment: knotted rope, a grappling hook, crampons
and pitons, the usual usual.
     The Humvee waited--God and Albert knew
where. Would we find it? Would it run if we did? I
tried not to think about such questions as, with great
solemnity, the President of the Twelve led us through
the inner compound to a small, cinder-block building
. . . and to the escape tunnel.
     14
Other members of the community gathered
     around us before we departed. Somewhere back in my
mind, I wondered why we weren't hearing a heroic
anthem to speed us on our way. Where was the brass
band? Where were the speeches? In my mind, I heard
fragments of the speech: "Never before have so few
faced so many in the defense of so few." Well, that
wasn't exactly right.
     There were a large number of heavy barrels of fuel
oil in the building, seemingly stacked somewhat hap-
hazardly. A pair of soldiers approached one particular
barrel carrying an odd tool that looked like a giant-
sized jar opener.
     They lowered the prongs over the barrel and pushed
levers forward, running steel rods through the lip.
Then they put their shoulders to the two ends of the
"jar opener" and walked counterclockwise. Rather
than tip over, the barrel unscrewed like a light bulb;
they lifted the heavy, false barrel from the narrow
tunnel, just barely wide enough to admit a single man
of my size.
     Arlene took point. She tchked and winked at the
President and blew him a kiss; his face flushed bright
red. Then she held her AB-10 pointed straight down
and dropped out of sight. Albert followed, then Jill; I
went last.
     We dropped into what looked at first like pitch-
dark; then, as our eyes adjusted, we found the slight
ambient light adequate to see a few meters ahead and
behind.
     The light came from phosphorescent mold, and the
tunnel was deliberately carved to look natural, a
fissure meandering left and right but mainly going
straight northwest. It was wide enough for two
abreast, and Arlene and Albert walked the point--
Albert because he alone knew the route. I took tail-
end Charlie, leaving Jill reasonably protected in the
center.
     Before we started, I cautioned the crew: "From here
on, no talking, not even for emergencies. We'll use the
Marine Corps hand language; Jill, you just watch me.
They may have listening devices, hunting for tunnels.
Let's not make it easy on them, all right?"
     The tunnel was cool and dark, a relief from the hot
sun of the Utah desert; at night, I hoped it would also
insulate us from the freezing overnight temps. We
could be underground for ... how many klicks?
Eight kilometers, signed Albert in response to my
silent question.
     Six passed by at breakneck speed . . . well, as
breakneck as you can get shimmying through under-
ground caverns with rough, natural-hewn floors in
limited light. Took us more than six hours, in fact, not
much of a speed record. But the end was in sight,
metaphorically speaking. We had just finished our
fourth rest and were ready to tackle the final quarter.
As Arlene ducked and stepped under an archway, I
heard a sound that chilled me to the marrow: the
startled hiss of an imp.
     We were not alone.
Reacting to the sound, Arlene backpedaled; she
stuck her arm out and caught Albert on her way back,
knocking both of them to the ground.
     The move saved their lives; a flaming ball of mucus
hurled past where they had stood but an instant
before and splattered explosively against the wall.
Arlene didn't bother rising; she raised her machine
pistol and fired from supine. I swung my shotgun
around and unloaded the outside barrel; between the
two of us, we blew the spiny apart.
     It had buddies. As Arlene and Albert scrambled to
their feet, and the latter fumbled his Uzi clone,
swearing under his breath in a most un-Mormonlike
manner, I pushed Jill to the ground and unloaded my
second barrel, decapitating a zombie who wielded a
machete.
     I cracked and reloaded; Albert finally got every-
thing pointed in the right direction and loosed a
volley of lead.
     We had surprised the bastards, and now they
weren't even sure where we were shooting from. To
make things worse, the zombie troops had zeroed in
on the imps, catching them in a cross fire with us.
I pushed Arlene forward, and she charged, taking
advantage of the distraction. Yanking Jill to her feet, I
followed; but we were several steps behind our team-
mates.
     Arlene broke left and Albert kept on straight, taking
after the two clumps of spinys--who made the fatal
mistake of turning their attention to their own pathet-
ic troops.
     To my horror, I realized what this resistance meant:
the tunnel was breached; if the aliens knew about the
tunnel, then soon troops would come pouring down
the pipe, lurching directly into the heart of the last
human enclave for hundreds of klicks!
     Albert must have realized the terrible danger at the
same moment. He took advantage of a lull to flash a
frantic sign: explosives--tunnel--blow up--hurry!
I got the message. The Mormons had intelligently
lined their own escape tunnel with high explosive; if
we could somehow find the detonator, we could
collapse the tunnel, saving the compound.
     But how? Where? I doubted even Albert knew
where the nearest fuse lay--and wouldn't blowing the
tunnel blow us up as well?
     But considering that it was I who brought this
trouble upon them, it was clearly my duty to do it...
even at the loss of my own life in the explosion.
But first we'd have to take care of these brown,
leathery bastards.
     Arlene had gone left and Albert straight; but one
imp suddenly lurched out of the darkness to our right
out of nowhere. I caught it out of the corner of my eye.
"Jill!" I shouted, violating my own orders. "Look
out!"
     Fortunately, like Rikki Tikki Tavi, she knew better
than to waste time looking. She hit the deck face first
as I unloaded both barrels over her body.
     The imp landed nearly on top of the girl. If it had, it
probably would have crushed her to death: those
damned demons mass 150 kilograms!
     Arlene and Albert finished killing their targets, and
I started to relax.
     Then I noticed what the imp I had just killed held
in its claws. Damn, but it sure looked suspiciously like
a satchel charge.
     For an instant I froze, then that little voice behind
my eyeballs whispered, Fly, you know, standing like a
statue might not be the best career move right about
now. . .
     "RUN!" I bellowed, bolting straight forward, pick-
ing up Jill on the fly. I ran right up to the imp and
right over it, gritting my teeth against the expected
blast.
     It didn't blow up. Not until we had all made about
ten meters down the tunnel.
     The explosion was loud, but not deafening; it was
the sequence of seven or eight explosions after the
satchel charge that rattled my brains.
     We kept running like bloody lunatics as we heard
the loudest report yet. It sounded like it was directly
over our heads--and the tunnel began to collapse.
A million tons of rock and dirt crashed down on my
head, and something hard and remarkably bricklike
cracked my skull. I was hurled to the ground by the
concussion . . . and when I swam back to conscious-
ness, I found myself lying half underneath a huge pile
of collapsed tunnel roof. Had we been just a few
footfalls slower, we'd have all been buried under it.
A steel brace arched up from our position, slightly
bent. About five meters overhead I saw daylight; but
ahead of us there was only rubble.
     "Congratulations," gasped Arlene, picking herself
up and choking in the dust. "You found the only door
frame for a hundred meters in each direction! You
sure you never lived in L.A., say during an earth-
quake?"
     No one was crippled; Jill needed first aid for a nasty
cut on her forehead, and I needed about five or six
Tylenols.
     Albert stared forward into the collapse, then up at
the sky. "Course correction, Corporal," he said. "I
think it's time we rose above all this."
     We made a human ladder: I stood at the bottom,
then Albert on my shoulders, then Arlene on his.
Reaching up, she caught hold of the bracing beam and
held herself steady for Jill to climb like a monkey up
and out. She secured a rope and threw the end back
down for the rest of us.
     Outside, the sun was just setting, a faint flash of
green in the western sky. The exploding, collapsing
tunnel left a long, plowed furrow running jaggedly
along the hard-packed dirt of the desert floor.
We hurried away from the site, found a rocky hill
and lay on our bellies on its top. When the stars
appeared, Albert sighted on Polaris, then pointed the
direction we should journey. "The ranch is another
four klicks yonder," he said. "We ought to be there
before midnight."
     Three hours later we skulked onto the deserted,
burned-out ranch. Near the barn was a huge haystack.
Inside the haystack, covered in a yellow, plastic tarp,
was a surprise.
     Ordinarily, I'd have rather run during the night and
holed up in the daylight; but the aliens were more
active at night. And more important, we were all
utterly spent. Arranging a three-way watch over Jill's
protest, we collapsed into sleep. Despite her threat,
Jill didn't awaken until Arlene shook her the next
morning.
     The engine of the Humvee groaned into life, the
coughing gradually diminishing. The thing might
actually run, I thought. Jill almost jumped up and
down with excitement as the machine started to
move. She was a kid again, forgetting all the crap of
the universe in the presence of a new toy. The little
things that bothered her sense of dignity vanished.
She was why we would win the war against the
monsters, no matter how many battles were lost. And
no matter what happened to us.
     "Here we go," said Albert, holding an Auto Club
map as if it were a dagger. He was a lot more dashing
than the President.
     "Let's kick some monster butt," said the old
Arlene.
     After two hours of a steady, off-road seventy kilom-
eters per hour, we'd seen no signs of the changed
world; but I knew this illusion couldn't last. While it
did, I enjoyed every minute of it. An empty landscape
is the most beautiful sight in the world when it doesn't
contain smashed buildings, burning remains of civili-
zation, and fields of human corpses. Of course, it
would have been nice to see a bird, or hear one.
There was a long line of straight road ahead, so I
asked Jill if she would like to drive the Humvee.
"Cool," she said. "What do I do?"
     I let her hold the wheel, and she seemed satisfied. A
Humvee is a big horse, and I wasn't about to put the
whole thing in her charge. But she seemed comfort-
able, as if she had driven large vehicles before , . .
possibly a tractor?
     Our first stop was for a bathroom break. That's
when I saw the first evidence that Earth wasn't what it
used to be: a human skull all by itself, half buried in
the dirt. Nothing else around it--no signs of a strug-
gle. But dislodging it with my shoe revealed a small
patch of clotted scalp still on the bone. The ants
crawling over this spot provided the final touch. What
was this fresh skull doing here all by itself?
"Ick," said Jill, catching sight of my find. I could
say nothing to improve on that.
     "What's that odor?" asked Arlene.
"It's coming from up ahead," observed Albert.
It was the familiar, old sour lemon smell. . .
unmistakable bouquet of finer zombies everywhere.
As we resumed the journey, the terrain altered.
There were twisted shapes on the horizon made of
something pink and white that glistened in the sun.
They reminded me of the flesh blocks that might still
be pounding endlessly up and down on Deimos.
These were shaped more like the stalagmites I'd seen
in my spelunking days. They didn't belong out here.
The whiff of sour lemon grew stronger, which
meant zombies shambling nearby or rotting in a ditch
somewhere close. My stomach churned in a way it
hadn't since Deimos.
     The sky altered as well. The blue slowly shaded into
a sickly green with a few red streaks, as if pools of
green sludge were leaking into the sky.
     We were all quiet now, fearing that to say anything
was to ruin that last glow of quiet friendship before
the storm. I glanced at Jill. She wore a determined
expression better than the President of the Council of
Twelve wore his gun.
     Arlene and Albert checked out the ammo and guns,
more for something to do. Jill was content to stay up
front and help drive the vehicle.
     Arlene finally broke silence: "You know, Fly, they
gave us more than we can pack with us when we dump
the Humvee, if we're going to be able to stow aboard
the damned train when it slows down."
     "Yeah," I said. "Take what you can."
Jill looked over her shoulder. "Can I help?" she
asked.
     "We're doing okay," said Albert.
"You're not throwing out my machine gun, are
you?" she asked suspiciously.
     Albert laughed, the first sound of happiness since
we crossed over into what I was already dubbing
Infernal Earth. "Honey, we'll toss food and water
before we let go of a good weapon."
     "My name's not--" she started to say, then noticed
Albert's friendly expression. Context and tone of
voice made a difference. I wouldn't be surprised if we
weren't the first people in her life to treat her like a
person.
     There was the sound of an explosion to the west. "Is
that thunder?" asked Jill. She stared to the right, but
there was nothing to see.
     "No," I said. "Someone is playing with fire-
crackers."
     "Something, more likely," said Arlene.
"Behold," said Albert in a low voice, obviously
speaking to himself, "that great city Zarahemla have I
burned with fire, and the inhabitants thereof."
Jill suddenly surprised me by turning around and
facing Albert, asking: "Are you saying the monsters
are a judgment of God against the human race?"
"No," he said, "I think it is a testing."
     Arlene had promised not to talk religion with the
boss. Now the circumstances had changed. Albert was
a comrade. She'd talk about anything to a comrade.
"Would you say what the Nazis did to the Jews was
a testing?" she asked angrily.
     "The most important lesson from what Hitler did
to the Jews," he said calmly, "was that at the end of
the war, they were still in the world. I'd call that a
testing, one they passed by surviving when the 'Thou-
sand Year Reich' was destroyed. If they'd been de-
stroyed, it would have been a judgment."
     Arlene fumed at Albert, but didn't say anything.
Obviously, his answer irritated her at some level, but
she couldn't think of an intelligent response.
"In space," she said finally, "on Phobos, we found a
giant swastika." She let her observation hang in the
air, waiting for the Mormon to respond.
     "What do you think it means?" he asked.
Arlene sighed. "I don't know; except it's a reason
for me to hate them more."
     "I would hate them just as much," said Albert, "if
you had found the cross up there, or the flag of the
United States, which I believe was also inspired by
God. A symbol used by aliens means nothing to me.
We know them by their fruits."
     "Oh, fug," said Jill. "This is like being back in class.
Don't give me a test, Albert."
     I figured it was a good time to move on. "I'm with
Albert," I said. "Symbols mean nothing outside of
their context. But I never expected to hear that from a
religious guy!"
     "I'm full of mysteries," he said.
I was glad for our little debate. It took our mind off
the fact that the sky kept changing. It was now
completely green. Made me think of fat frogs and
mold. The lemon stench was bad enough that it
seemed the same as back on Deimos and Phobos. I
had forgotten how after a while you get used to
anything and then you could ignore it.
     Albert reminded us he was in charge of the map by
pointing out we were nearing the sabotage point. "I'd
say we're a mile away," he said.
     "Let me take the wheel back, Jill." The kid didn't
argue, glad to say. I started slowing down the
Humvee.
     "We need to tip it over on the tracks just past that
curve," said Albert. "We don't want to derail the
train."
     "Right," I said. "They should see it in plenty of
time after they come around the bend."
     "Have you given any thought to how we're going to
tip this monster over?" asked Arlene. "It must weigh
a couple of tons."
     "I sure have. That's why I brought along--Block
and Tackle in a Drum!"
     She didn't seem to appreciate the humor.
15
     No, really, A.S. I'm not joking."
"I'm not laughing."
     I held up the drum.
Arlene squinted. "C-4? Plastic explosive?"
     "Just a soupcon. A bit of spice for an otherwise
drab mission."
     The others stood back at a safe distance as I parked
the vehicle next to the tracks, molded a goodly glob
on both front and rear left tires, then rolled it forward
until the C-4 was against the ground. I fused both
bunches with identical lengths of det cord, lay flat and
closed the connection.
     Jill covered her ears; clever kid.
The Humvee is normally one of the most stable-
wheeled vehicles ever built; but even its wide body
and long wheel base was never meant to stand up to a
double charge beneath the left side. With a flash and a
bang, the C-4 did its job: the wheels blew off, but not
before the entire vehicle jerked into the air and rolled
along the longitudinal axis, landing upside down on
the rails. I held my breath as it skittered and spun--
but it came to rest still blocking the tracks.
I even had more C-4, just in case we'd needed a
slight adjustment.
     "That wasn't too tough," declared Arlene, standing
with hands on hips, surveying the undercarriage.
"Of course you'd say that," I complained, "after
letting me do all the work."
     "You! You mean you and Charlie Four!"
"What do we do now?" asked Jill.
     "We guard the gear," I said, "and hurry up and
wait. Hey, welcome to the armed forces."
     "Inconsiderate of the fiends not to post their sched-
ules for us," said Albert.
     "Amen," agreed Arlene, to Albert's amusement. I
had expected her to say something sarcastic in reply,
but she patted him on the arm. They really seemed to
like each other. Maybe their argument over Judgment
Day was a test for each other.
     The idea, of course, was for us to climb aboard
when the train stopped to clear the tracks. We'd stay
back until it started to move again; then we'd take a
running leap and catch the ladders, humping up to the
roof.
     I was worried about Jill; I had no idea whether she
could make the jump; and if she missed . . . But she
was a wiry kid and looked like a tomboy. All the
same, I quietly removed everything heavy from her
pack, including her CompMac ultramicro; couldn't
afford to let her drop it under the wheels ... or drop
herself.
     "Can I put my ear to the track and listen for the
vibration?" asked Jill. "I saw that in a movie."
"You don't think you'll fall asleep?" I asked back.
"It could be a long wait."
     She assumed the position and managed to stay
down for a good twenty minutes before flipping over
and trying the other ear. Fifteen minutes after that
she decided that it could be a long wait and joined us
over by the stuff, around the hill.
     "Why do they have to change the sky?" Jill asked.
"I don't know," said Arlene, "but it makes me
appreciate the night. At least we won't see the green
then."
     Albert passed around some beef jerky. We had
plenty of water and didn't have to worry about
rationing yet. We carried chlorine pills to purify the
water, which wouldn't help much if the aliens poi-
soned it with some nerve toxin.
     Jill poked Albert. "Why do you think these are
demons if they can be killed?"
     He looked at me, raising his brows.
"Don't give me a hard time," I said. "I haven't
discussed it with her. She can think for herself, you
know."
     "There are greater and lesser powers," he said.
"There is nothing wrong with viewing these creatures
as alien invaders as our Marine friends do. But we
believe they would not have taken on these guises
unless they were directed by genuine demonic
forces."
     "Then why don't we exercise them?" said Jill.
Arlene smiled. "You mean exorcise, Jill."
     "I like exercise better," I interjected. "Some of
these monsters seem out of shape to me. We should
capture one and PT the hell out of it."
     "Speaking of which--" Albert began, but he didn't
have to finish. The train whistle was high and loud, a
lonely call from the remnants of our world. "I don't
think you'll need to place your ear to the track," I told
Jill.
     First, there was the rumbling. Then it came around
the bend, bigger than life, the engine the head of a
dragon, each car behind it a segment of spinal cord.
Thousands of tons rushed toward our little Humvee,
lying across the dark rails like a sacrificial offering.
"It's not slowing down," whispered Jill.
     There was no way the man or monster in the engine
couldn't see the obstacle in the path of the train. The
natural reaction was to slow and stop.
     Instead, they chose the unnatural reaction--
dispelling any doubts about what sort of creature was
driving. The monsters were among us.
     The damned train sped up! The drone of the giant
diesel electric motors drowned out the world, sinking
our great plan beneath drifts of sand as if drowning in
that dry ocean.
     Jill moved forward, still going to give it a try; but no
way would I let her commit suicide. I grabbed her arm
hard and shouted, "Back off, everyone!" If that behe-
moth came off the tracks, it could explode and
obliterate us like bugs. I had other plans, foremost
among them to stay alive.
     We ran, the roaring of metal-on-metal and groaning
diesels directly behind us. We felt the impact of the
collision before we heard it, as the vibration tuning-
forked through the desert into the soles of our feet and
up to our hearts. The sound ripped through my head,
made my teeth ache, and squeezed my lungs with the
weight of the crash.
     Bible stories ran through my head, the good old
King James version, with the Old Testament warnings
and massacres. Lot's wife looked behind her after the
Lord God told her not to. She was too curious for her
own good--my kind of woman. I couldn't resist a
backward glance either.
     The train plowed through the Humvee like it wasn't
even there except as a sound effect. Pieces of our
transportation flew at us, and I realized there was a
certain wisdom to Bible stories. This crap could sever
our necks and smash us to pulp. You could actually
hurt an eye.
     We kissed dirt, and something whizzed past my
right ear, but I had no curiosity to see what it was.
Finally, the dangerous sounds went away.
     Standing up to see the remains of our vehicle, I
checked that my three buddies weren't bleeding or
buried under hunks of twisted metal. The receding
train reeled drunkenly from rail to rail, like an Iowa
farm boy with a snootful on his first night of liberty. I
half expected to see a fat, red demon riding in the
caboose, leaning out and giving us the finger. Then
again, a good number of these beasties lacked the
digits and dexterity to perform such a feat.
"So," said Arlene, after a long, dramatic pause.
"What's Plan B?"
     Jill occupied herself spitting out a mouthful of dirt,
while Albert helped her to her feet. "Liabilities," I
said: "no Humvee; no train."
     "Assets?"
"We're alive; we still have our weapons."
     "Feets do your stuff," said Albert.
"We'll hike into Phoenix," I said. "It's already late
afternoon. Better for us to travel by night anyway,
especially on foot."
     "Great," said Jill, but when she didn't continue the
complaint, I let it slide. A little bitching from the
troops can have its salutary effects.
     Whatever the green crap in the atmosphere was, it
didn't prevent the stars coming out, although the
twinkle was a bit weird. Footsore and weary, we took
our first rest stop at midnight.
     "My first girlfriend lived in Scottsdale," said Al-
bert. "I always enjoyed Arizona."
     "Was she a Mormon?" Arlene blurted out.
"No; I'm a convert. We didn't believe in much of
anything, not even each other."
     "Why do you like Arizona?" asked Arlene.
"The desert is clean. The mountains are clean. And
best of all, there's no humidity."
     "You sound like a travel folder," I said.
"Not anymore," he sighed.
     "We'll get our world back, Albert," said Arlene.
An attack of commanditis seized Yours Truly: "If
we're going to save the Earth, then we need to sleep, in
shifts." I took first watch so everyone else could sleep,
but Jill joined me.
     "I can't sleep," she said, "so don't try and make
me."
     "No, I'm glad for your company," I said. "I hate
wasting the rest of the night, and I'm not tired either.
When Albert and Arlene wake up, I'm thinking we
should move on."
     "Fine with me," she said. "I think they're sweet on
each other."
     I stared at Jill, wondering where the hell that
comment came from. I didn't say a word, but the
teenager had given me something to think about
besides how many rounds it took to put down a
spidermind.
     Absolutely nothing else happened for four days,
except Arlene and Albert spent a lot of time arguing,
leaving me to debate computer ethics with the
fourteen-year-old net-cop of the month. Jill was down
on even the slightest infraction against privacy ... by
anyone.
     It was dawn on the fifth day when we arrived on the
outskirts of Phoenix. A number of buildings were
rubble, but some were still standing. We decided to
hole up in one of those. With weapons loaded and in
hand, we moved in. I was pleased to note Jill handled
herself well. This was good. If anything happened, I'd
be too busy to hold anyone's hand.
     In the first alley we entered, we ran into an appetiz-
er of three pathetic zombies. Albert, Arlene, and I
acted so quickly that Jill didn't even get off a shot--
but it was her first contact with the enemy.
We rounded the corner and found ourselves in the
enviable position of staring at three zombie backs. It
was two males and a female; one of the males a
civilian, the other an Army sergeant, and the woman
used to be a cop in life.
     Any qualms I had ever had about shooting women
in the back were burned out of me up on Phobos.
Phobos meant "fear," and fear was a marvelous
teacher. Without a word, I swung my double-barreled
shotgun up to my shoulder, sighted as if aiming for a
clay pigeon, and let fly with the outer trigger.
The living-dead female cop pitched forward with-
out a sound, her head vanishing in a haze of red and
green blood and gray brain matter. The other two
growled and started to turn, but the soldier-zombie
took two taps in the head from Arlene before he got
even halfway around. She kept her AB-10 on single-
shot; no sense wasting ammo.
     The third zombie was armed only with a stick of
some sort; it looked like it used to be a gas station
attendant. It shambled toward us, unafraid, of course;
its only desire was to beat us into a bloody pulp and
perhaps eat the remains.
     Jill whimpered and sank to one knee, fumbling her
AR-19 around. Her numb, nerveless hands shook,
and she suddenly had not even the strength to pull
back the T-bar and cock the weapon.
     Well, no reason to dump a death on her conscience,
even a zombie death; she'd have plenty more chances.
Sparing her a friendly glance, I raised my shotgun
again, the outer barrel still unfired. But Albert beat
me to the punch, expertly firing a quick, three-round
burst that caught the zombie in the face, destroying it
instantly. The guy was good: he had literally fired
from the hip on rock 'n' roll and tapped it perfectly.
I stole a look; his face was grim, determined. I had
no trouble believing he had been a sniper.
     The soup course consisted of five imps who were
attracted by the noise. Given the time of day, thinking
of breakfast would be more appropriate. Time to fry
the bacon.
     They came shuffling around the corner, already
wadding up balls of flaming snot. One was a fast
mother; it heaved its flame wad before we could get
off a shot, and Arlene had to hit the deck to evade.
I heard a snik-click, as Jill finally ran the slide,
cocking the hammer and slamming a round into the
chamber.
     I discharged my remaining barrel, knocking an imp
to the dirt; it was still alive. I crabbed sideways,
cracking the breech and sliding two more shells
inside, while Albert fired short bursts, alternating
between the nearest imps. Each burst drove the target
backward a few steps.
     Then a dead-eye spiny from the back ranks chucked
a mucus ball over the front ranks, catching Albert on
the shoulder. It splattered across his armor, still
burning, and he yelped and dropped the Uzi clone.
Arlene got to one knee, clicked the lever one notch
down, and began firing bursts at the still-advancing
imps. She focused fire on one imp at a lime, taking
them down.
     One of them slid by us somehow; none of us saw the
damned thing. All of a sudden I turned and it was in
my face, hissing and screaming like death on two legs.
16
     I backpedaled but took a piece of flame wad
in the face anyway. Blinded and agonized, I dropped
the shotgun to the pavement and grabbed my face,
screaming. I heard and felt the 180-kilogram monster
looming over me, and I steeled myself to take a savage
swipe to the ribs.
     The swipe never came. I heard the high-pitched
"rim shot" sound of the AR-19 discharging on full
auto, and the monster pitched forward against me. I
rolled to slip it as it fell; I sure didn't want to get
crushed underneath.
     By the time I was able to blink my eyesight back,
the rest of the spinys were room-temp . . . and Jill
stood over the body of her very first kill, managing to
look simultaneously triumphant, sick, and scared to
death.
     "Congratulations, girl," I croaked, still grimacing at
the pain, "virgin no more."
     "Thanks." She looked as ambivalent as she proba-
bly would in a couple of years, when she lost the other
form of virginity . . . unless I'm showing my age by
presuming she hadn't already.
     My mistake; one of the critters wasn't quite dead.
When we huddled to assess damages, it leapt to its
feet and took off down the alley. Arlene, the Hermes
of the group, bolted after the thing, Albert hot on her
heels.
     We raced the imp. I'd never seen one move this fast
before. Was it that this one had the sense to be afraid,
or had the genetic engineering made some improve-
ments?
     The imp scooted around a corner. Arlene followed,
then Albert, and finally Yours Truly. Jill was some-
where behind.
     We spied an open door across the alley, and Arlene
and Albert made a beeline for it; but I noticed a
nearby trailer was rocking back and forth, as if
someone had just entered.
     "Over here!" I yelled. I wasn't used to an imp doing
something as clever as opening a door to mislead his
pursuers before doubling back to his real objective;
but then I hadn't expected the imp on Phobos to talk
either.
     The door was locked, but a trailer door hardly
merited the waste of ammo. As I started to kick it, I
heard a familiar sound. Once you've heard the
humming-whizzing sound of a teleporter, you never
forget it.
     One good thump and we were in; a few sparks of
light hung in space over the rectangular piece of
metal. "Damn," I said.
     "Shazam!" said Arlene.
"Huh?" asked Albert.
     "Just making a little joke before your time," she
said.
     "Hey, I've had friends who take that stuff," Albert
countered. "It's bad stuff, ma'am."
     "We'll get into the cross-cultural discussion later,
kids," I said. "Right now we have more important
problems. Like, should we follow this one or leave
well enough alone?"
     "If we follow," said Albert, "it might put us in the
center of this thing."
     "I think we shouldn't follow, exactly because it
might put us in the center of this thing," said Arlene.
They both had a good point. There was no ques-
tioning Albert's courage; but Arlene and I had the
experience.
     I felt a disturbance in the Force behind me. Jill
squeezed in, her face hard, cheeks streaked where
she'd been crying. But she was in control, the mask
tight.
     "Let's vote on it," she suggested, demonstrating
she'd picked up some vile, egalitarian habits from
somewhere.
     "Sure," I said. "A show of hands for all those who
think we should follow the imp through the
     teleporter." Albert and Jill raised their hands. "Now,
those against." Arlene raised her hand.
     "If you vote with her, it's a tie," said Jill, proving
she'd taken some courses in the Higher Arithmetic.
"It's not necessary for me to vote," I said, "because
Arlene's vote counts as three. The nays carry."
"Oh!" exclaimed Jill, frustrated. Albert merely
shrugged.
     "Let's put a guard on the grid," I said. "The spiny
could return with reinforcements: hell-princes,
pumpkins--"
     "Maybe even a steam-demon," Arlene added. We
could tell that the new monster fighters weren't ex-
actly following the conversation.
     "There's lots of different aliens," said Arlene.
"I know that," said Jill, a touch defensively.
"I'll take first watch," said Albert. "If we're not
going to follow, I'd suggest we hide out in the trailer
. . . but maybe that's not such a good idea. Instead of
teleporting, the--imp?--might drive up with a tank
column. Are we waiting until night before we leave?"
"On foot we'd wait," I said, "but in this truck, the
Bad Guys will probably just assume we're members of
the club. Who but a monster or zombie would be
driving in this region now? Besides, Albert is right; we
have to get out of here like now."
     "Assuming zombies can drive," mumbled Arlene.
"If they have brains enough to shoot, they have
brains enough to drive," I said.
     "Can I drive the truck?" asked Jill, eyes wide. "It
would really be cool."
     I've created a Frankenstein's monster! I thought.
"Can you drive a stick?" I asked. She nodded. "A big
rig like this, double-clutching, multiple forward gears?
Have you ever?"
     "Well, not this big," she admitted. "But I'm sure I
can handle it."
     Normally, that wouldn't be good enough. But this
time, I wanted all three seasoned fighters in the back
in case the imp came back with a beastie battalion.
"Wait a minute," I said. "Maybe we can take the
truck and not be stuck with the damned teleporter." I
went back to it, crouched down and examined it
thoroughly. It was literally melded to the steel floor;
the only way to leave it would be to ditch the entire
trailer. But we still had to get to a place of safety
before we could stop long enough to unhitch cab from
caboose.
     "How about I go up front and look for the keys,"
said Jill, growing happier by the second. She wasn't
about to let this opportunity slip by her.
     "I'm going with you," I said, praying the monsters
would not choose this moment to invade.
     There were no keys in the cab, but I found a set in
one of those little magnetic holders outside, under-
neath the left front fender. This bothered me. If the
monsters were using the truck, why would they hide
the key? Or had they not even used this vehicle as a
vehicle since they attached the teleporter?
     I didn't know how long we'd use the cab--maybe
only long enough to hop the next train, assuming we
could warp back to the original plan. But in the field,
no plan was any good that didn't adjust instantly to
reality. If the truck could get us a good piece of the
way, we should go for it. If it caused more problems,
then we could always switch back to playing hobo.
Jill opened the glove compartment and found a
map showing the most direct route to L.A.--good old
I-10; the best truck stops were marked for conve-
nience. The original driver had been most obliging. If
we were lucky, some of these stations might be
abandoned, with stocks of fuel waiting for us. I could
do without demonic attendants offering free human
sushi with every fill-up. I'd definitely go with self-
service, even if I had to shoot it out for the privilege.
Jill started the engine and I gave her a lecture about
reading gauges. As if I had any idea what I was doing!
But you can't let kids think you don't know.
This led right into a few more lectures about
overheating the engine, dust storms, fatigue factors,
and highway hypnosis.
     At no point did Jill try to shoot me. Her self-control
was exactly what you demand of a good Marine.
"At least there won't be many cars for me to run
into," she predicted. If I didn't know better, I'd think
she wasn't trying to cheer me up.
     "Go west, young lady," I said as a parting shot.
"Find us somewhere safe to park and disconnect. I
don't like hauling around this reinforcement roach
coach."
     "See you later," she answered.
I returned to the back and caught Arlene grinning
like the Cheshire cat that just ate the bird store. Albert
seemed amused by something as well.
     "You were up there a long time," she said.
"Looking for the keys," I answered solemnly.
"You took a long time getting back here since the
engine started," said Albert.
     I wouldn't let them get to me: "Giving her a few
helpful tips, that's all. I'm sure she'll do fine." At that
precise moment the truck lurched forward and
stalled. Everything in the back shifted forward, except
for the teleporter pad. The teleporter pad was just
fine.
     Arlene laughed. At no point did I try to shoot her; if
Jill could hold it, so could I. I'm trained, a
professional--a Marine.
     Jill finally got the hang of shifting--I suppose she
had had some training--and we were on our way. She
proved herself a teenager by driving too fast; then she
swerved suddenly, creating a new mystery to solve:
what the hell was she avoiding?
     Being thrown around inside gave me motion sick-
ness; I hadn't felt this bad since the last time I was on
a friend's boat and got seasick. But I wasn't complain-
ing. Not me.
     Besides, just about the time I would have risked
Arlene's mirth, the spiny sent us a Christmas present.
There was a brief moment of warning, the hum-
ming and the glow. We trained our weapons on the
spot, allowing for a split second of identification.
There was always the remote possibility of a human
escaping from hell.
     Then the thing materialized. It wasn't a recruit for
humanity's army. And it wasn't a zombie, an imp, or
any other old friend. The bastards had sent us a new
monster.
     There was something especially odd about the
appearance. This sucker wore clothes! He had on red
shorts and a white T-shirt. At a quick glance, it looked
like a living skeleton in lederhosen. There wasn't time
for a closer look--we already delayed firing a second
too long. The idiotic wardrobe threw us off.
The thing jumped at me, picked me up with one
hand and threw me at the wall. I rolled with the
impact and scrambled to my feet, still holding onto
my twelve-gauge; but before I could fire, the monster
had Arlene in one claw and Albert in the other. Thin
as it was, we were like rag dolls in its hands.
Jill was shouting through the partition, wondering
what was wrong. I would have loved to tell her, but I
was otherwise occupied, waiting for a clear shot.
The skeleton flung Albert down, but kept hold of
Arlene. The angle made Arlene a shield, so I started
maneuvering around, trying to maintain my footing
with Jill's increasingly panicked driving. As I tried for
a better position, the damned bone pile turned and
punched out Albert!
     I mean, it hauled off and slugged him, and he went
down for the count. The stupid red shorts suddenly
seemed like boxing shorts. If the invaders were devel-
oping a sense of humor, I knew the true meaning of
horror.
     Adding to the fun, Jill started swerving left and
right. Maybe she thought she was helping. She wasn't.
I heard a horrible crunching sound, and I was thrown
to the floor . . . but Red Skeleton remained planted as
if it had grown roots. Jill must have run into a car--
but from here, it was impossible to tell whether it had
been parked or was tooling down the road with Satan
himself at the wheel. At the moment, I didn't care
about anything except dismantling that freaking skel-
eton.
     Back on my feet, duck gun in hand, I shouted loud
enough for Jill to hear: "Keep steady and keep going!"
I was afraid that if she came to a sudden stop, it would
be an advantage for Mr. Bones. I needed my opening.
Then the dumb monster gave it to me. He put
     Arlene down so he could slug her. I let him place her
out of the line of fire, and the minute she was down, I
got in close to the thing and introduced its mouth to
both barrels. The mouth opened just like a human
one. I made sure it would never close again. I blew its
head clean off.
     This slowed it down. Unfortunately, decapitation
was not the last word with this guy. He'd spent so
much time throwing us around like preteen sparring
partners, I hadn't even noticed the pair of rocket
launchers strapped to its back--until now. In its
death throes, Bones bent forward like a hinge and
fired a rocket from each tube.
     Its head was pointing toward the front. . . and
that's where the rockets went.
     The thing splintering into constituent bones, but
Arlene was up from the floor in time to scream "Jill!"
I was already out the trailer door and scuttling along
the running board before the echo died away.
17
     The rockets blew through the front of the
trailer and the back of the cab, passing on either side
of a white-faced Jill while she was driving. Either side.
By some miracle worthy of every Holy Book ever
written, both rockets missed her.
     "Jesus and Mary!" I shouted. I slid through the hole
where the cab wall used to be and sat down next to
Jill. She was white as cotton, shaking like an AK on
full-auto, gripping the wheel so hard I half expected
her to leave indentations. First Rule of Talking to the
Driver When the Driver is in Shock: "It missed you,
Jill; you're all right."
     She nodded very slowly, but didn't speak. I tried
another tack: "Wouldn't you like a break from driv-
ing?" She nodded again. "Well, why don't you pull
over, uh, there," I said, pointing to a tree-lined side
street. There was nothing around here; we could pull
the plug on the teleporter trailer. Jill pulled over.
"Would you stay up here on watch while I return to
the others?" I asked.
     She finally spoke: "Yes. I will. Fly." I patted her on
the shoulder, glad she'd addressed me that way. I
suspected she would be driving more conservatively
after this. I decided not to ask her about the car.
As Jill parked and sobbed, I crawled back into the
trailer. "Our new convenient, modern cab," I said,
"lots of ventilation makes it easier than ever to move
back and forth."
     My attempt at gallows humor fell on adder's ears.
"Fly," said Arlene, voice shaking, "maybe we should
acquire another vehicle."
     "Why?" I asked. She stared at me dumbfounded.
"Let's take a closer look at our new critter," I con-
tinued.
     On first contact it appeared to have no skin at all.
But close examination showed a thin layer of almost
transparent epidermis. Close up, it looked a man in
the terminal stages of starvation.
     "I'd hoped we wouldn't see anything like this," said
Arlene.
     Albert started to get the drift and asked: "You never
saw one like this in space?"
     "No," I answered, "but we saw a place where they
manufactured creatures on an assembly line."
"And living blocks of flesh," said Arlene. "I'm
certain it was human flesh--experiments creating
human flesh."
     "The evils of science," said Albert.
I saw Arlene tense up, but this time it was my turn.
"There's no putting that genie back in the bottle, my
friend. We master everything the universe offers, or
we're wiped out, another failed experiment. No happy
medium or ignorant bliss."
     He held up his gun. "Maybe you're right," he said.
"This weapon would be black magic to Joseph Smith.
I should pick on the engineers instead of the scien-
tists. Some scientists say that some things we can do,
we must never do."
     "Such as?" asked Arlene.
"Godless genetic manipulation," he answered.
"That's what we're fighting, isn't it?"
     "Scientists who talk that way are the worst traitors
to the human race," said Arlene. "I don't really mind
religious people being afraid of new discoveries," she
said, "but scientists are supposed to know better. This
enemy's greatest power is biology. They've turned it
into a superweapon. If that means we have to learn to
use it ourselves, then we have to ... otherwise, we're
disarmed."
     "You'd turn us into monsters like that?" asked
Albert, pointing at the dead one. "Or our children?"
he added.
     "No, of course not," she said. "But why should you
object to genetically engineering angels?"
     "Because they already exist and will help us in the
hour of need."
     "Mexican standoff," I said. "This head-cutting is
officially declared a tie. Now, shall we return to the
matter at hand?"
     "Well, Fly," purred Arlene, "whose turn is it to
name this sucker?"
     "I'm sure it's yours," I lied.
She must have already decided, because right away
she said, "That's easy; a bony."
     "Brilliant," I said. "Don't you think so?" I asked
Albert.
     "I guess," he said. "I guess we should be able to tell
them apart."
     "Albert, would you mind checking on Jill?" I asked.
He was happy to get out of there. As Arlene and I
started decoupling the trailer, I whispered in her ear,
"So what do you think?"
     "I think they're getting closer to copying our real,
human form. Even the stupid clothes are a dangerous
advance. A goal of the aliens is probably to create
false humans; if they succeed, they can infiltrate the
areas not under alien control . . . like Salt Lake City."
"We can expect better frauds as time passes," I said.
"Now let's get to the next town along the railroad line,
hop a train, and continue to L.A."
     Albert and Jill were glad to hear the new plan.
While Arlene and I were busy worrying each other,
Albert had helped calm Jill down to the point where
she insisted on doing whatever driving remained.
Fortunately, it was a sleeper cab for partnered
driving; we squeezed in, Arlene and Albert in the
back, me up front with Jill, and set off down the road.
We passed a score of alien patrols, but the truck must
have had the mark of the beast on the grill, for none of
them threw us a second glance.
     The next town along the line was Buckeye. We
ditched the truck cab, then waited for night. We found
an alley and enjoyed the busy sounds of night life in
this modern world: troop trucks every few minutes,
the tramping of little zombie feet, screams of pain,
howled orders from hell-princes, and the occasional
earthshaking tread of steam-demons. Even more
soothing to our shattered nerves were mechanical
sounds that reminded me of the spidermind, evi-
dently a smaller model. I wondered if this one got
better mileage.
     "Have you noticed an odd thing?" whispered
Arlene.
     "You mean besides everything?" I replied.
"The aliens generally seem to know when humans
are around," she said.
     I hadn't thought about it before, but the facts
supported her. "How?"
     "Remember that lemony smell of theirs, right?" she
continued her line of argument. "What if we smell as
bad to them? They might detect us by the odor we
give off."
     "Maybe they deliberately give the reworked zom-
bies that odor so they can tell them apart from living
humans?"
     "You know, A.S., if the aliens start manufacturing
infiltrators, they sure as hell can't smell like zombies.
That would be a dead giveaway." My heart bled for
the technical difficulties faced by the alien imagineers.
The importance of having Arlene and Yours Truly
on this mission was the background we brought with
us. Remembering how we had turned the monsters
against each other upstairs, I figured we could try it
again when the time came. In fact, it should be even
easier to turn the monsters against the new infiltra-
tors: they wouldn't smell wrong enough.
     Meanwhile, there was the little matter of our imme-
diate survival and carrying on to L.A. . . . and that
meant hopping a freight as soon as possible.
"I have another plan," I told my loyal troops. I
hoped it would sound as good to me as I was about to
make it sound to them.
     We waited for another truck to go by before settling
down to the conference. It was easy to size up the
strengths and weaknesses of our little foursome. Jill
was brainy but callow; Albert was forthright, strong,
reliable, stalwart, and no dummy. But he had yet to
show the special kind of intelligence and instincts
needed for command (another reason for the Presi-
dent of the Twelve not to press about who would
command this mission). Arlene was cynical and so-
phisticated, the best woman soldier I'd ever known.
But at some deep level she lacked a certain badness
that was so much a part of Yours Truly that I didn't
have to think about it.
     The reason for me to be in charge was that I
wouldn't hesitate to sacrifice all our lives if I thought
it would make a difference in winning a crucial battle
in this war. Arlene could make the same decision, but
she'd hesitate where I wouldn't. In a strange way, I
was the safest of the adults to befriend the teenager
because no friendship or emotional ties would cloud
my military judgment. With all that Arlene and I had
faced up to this point, I counted myself fortunate that
we had survived. I was also glad that I hadn't needed
to be a perfect bastard. Yet.
     The truck passed, and they waited to hear the plan.
"You all know that we must infiltrate the train station
and stow away on an outgoing train. The risk will
increase once we do this. Let me point out that until
we reach the enemy computers, Jill is the only one not
expendable. After she retrieves the data, everyone is
expendable, so long as one of us survives to get it
through to the War Technology Center. Get it out to
Hawaii; they'll find you."
     "Yes," said Arlene calmly. Albert nodded. Jill
stared wide-eyed as my words registered.
     I continued: "I noticed a number of abandoned
grocery stores as we were working our way in. I don't
know if zombies still eat human food, but I doubt it.
And I'm certain the monsters don't."
     "Maybe the aliens can't digest what we eat," said
Albert.
     "Well," mused Arlene, "they can eat us; and we are
what we eat." She was being her usual, grisly self; but I
was the only one who smiled.
     "Whatever," I said. "So here's the plan. Albert, you
buzz to one of these stores and collect all the rotting
lemons you can."
     "I get it," he said. "That'll smell like those zombies
we gunned down . . ."
     "Like all zombies," said Arlene.
". . . and confuse their sniffers," he finished his
thought. "Arlene--would you come with me?" He
paused, as if surprised at what he'd said. He looked at
me, remembering our informal chain of command.
"Is it all right if she comes with me?" he asked. "I
mean, if it's okay with her." He stared at her a little
sheepishly.
     "I was going to assign you one of us," I said. "So
long as there are four of us, it's crazy for one to go off
alone. We'll always pair off when we have to sepa-
rate."
     "I'd like to go with Albert, then," said Arlene in an
even tone of voice, betraying nothing.
     "Fine," I said. "Jill and I will wait here until you
return. We'll assume you've run into trouble if you're
not back by, hm, 2200." Among items I was grateful
for, we still had functional watches. Who gave a damn
what day of the week or month it was any longer? The
importance of a wristwatch was to coordinate ac-
tivity.
     Jill and I watched as A&A checked their weapons
and moved out. They ran across the open space,
Arlene first, Albert bringing up the rear, and then I
could breathe again.
     "When do we move out?" asked Jill.
"In a moment. We're still safe here."
     The word "safe" triggered something in her. "I
hadn't thought about it until what you said, but I
don't like being more ..."
     "Critical to the mission."
"Uh-huh. Critical. It feels weird."
     "Don't worry," I said. "After you've done your
hacker bit, you have permission to die with the rest of
us." I tried for a light tone of voice but the words
sounded wrong.
     "I'm not afraid to die," she said.
"I know you're not. You did great in the truck, the
way you kept driving. I'm proud of you." Her whole
body relaxed when I told her that.
     I figured she could handle some more of my deep
thoughts. Arlene and I had been through so much
together that there were things I could say easier to
the new recruit: "Cowardice is usually not the prob-
lem in war, Jill. Most people have more guts than they
realize. Most can be trained to do all right."
"What's the problem, then?" she asked through
slitted eyes.
     I looked up and down the alley. We were still alone,
and it was a pleasure to hear the sounds of demonic
industry muffled and distant. The danger was at arm's
length, a good place to keep it as long as possible.
"In a way, we're lucky to be fighting monsters."
"Lucky?" she half shouted.
     "Keep your voice down!"
"Sorry."
     "Fighting monsters makes it easy. Up to now, all
the wars on Earth have been between human beings.
That's much harder."
     Her face scrunched up as she pondered what I said.
It was like watching thoughts march across her face.
"I could never hate human beings the way I hate the
demons," she said.
     "You're lucky to feel that way," I said.
"How does fighting monsters make it easier?" she
threw at me. "They're harder to kill than people."
"We don't take any prisoners," I said. "We don't
have to worry about any of that. And if we did take
one, we don't have to decide whether we should
torture him. Hell, we don't even know if they have a
nervous system like ours."
     "Torture?" she asked, wide-eyed again. Then she
thought about it. "I could torture them."
     "To get information?" I asked.
"To pay them back for what they've done."
     "Could you torture humans if they'd done the same
things?"
     "I don't know," she said. "What kind of torture?"
Looking at her, I remembered an officer who briefly
passed through Parris Island as my class officer before
moving on to Intelligence, maybe even the CIA (who
knows?).
     He took a whole slate of medical courses, though he
had no interest in being a doctor. He had a weak, limp
handshake. He probably couldn't fight his way out of
a revolving door. He scared the living crap out of me.
I figured I'd given a fourteen-year-old enough to chew
on for one day.
     "Any kind." I didn't elaborate.
"I think I could torture any humans who join the
aliens," she said.
     "Then you're home free," I said. "I don't think the
enemy is doing any recruiting except for zombies."
She brightened. "And we know what to do with
them, don't we, Fly?"
     "We sure do." I tried out one of my playful punches
on the kid's arm, like I did with Arlene. She pulled
away at first, then sort of apologetically punched
back. She gave off all the signs of having been abused
once. By human beings, probably. Human beings
always confuse the issue.
     Now it was time for us to hurry up and wait.
18
     I kind of felt bad leaving Fly and the kid to go
traipsing off with this geek.
     The first time I saw Albert, I thought he was a trog.
Maybe it was the way he held his weapon against the
head of the only other man in my life besides Wilhelm
Dodd who's ever been really worth a damn: Flynn
Taggart, corporal, United States Monkey Corps. As I
joined this Mormon beefcake on the grocery store
expedition, I found myself sneaking glances at his
profile, and finding strength where I'd first suspected
weakness.
     I've always loved strong men. That's how I remem-
ber my father. He died when I was only ten, so I may
not remember him with complete objectivity. But
that's the way I want to think of him. I grew up
defending his memory against my brother, who acted
like a snot and said Dad deserted us.
     I hadn't thought about my family since the invasion
began, except when Fly got me going on my brother
and the Mormon Church. I'd be happy to keep it out
of my mind and off my tongue, except that Albert
asked me: "You don't like Mormons much, do you?"
We were in an alley outside a likely grocery store,
taking a breather. Zombies were unloading bread
from a bread truck, an eighteen wheeler. Bet the boxes
didn't contain bread; and I wasn't sure I wanted to
know what was really in them.
     "I have a problem with all institutional churches," I
said. "It's nothing personal." Of course, it was per-
sonal and I'm not a very good liar.
     "If you don't want to talk about it, I'll understand,"
said Albert diplomatically. The big dork had some
smarts.
     Maybe I should talk to him. Fly and I were so close
that we couldn't verbalize everything there was be-
tween us. He had a little-boy quality that was attrac-
tive in a friend but definitely not what I wanted in a
lover. Maybe it was part of the Mormon conditioning,
but Albert projected father qualities.
     The one time I let myself be talked into therapy,
back in college when my family was exploding, I
dropped hundreds of dollars to be told what I already
knew. My ideal male friend would be the brother I
never had. Fly was just what the doctor ordered. My
ideal lover was Daddy. The therapist was a Freudian
so he didn't have much imagination.
     The women's group I hung out with for one sum-
mer had a lot more imagination. It wasn't my fault
that the experiences of my youth fit the Freudian
pattern better than they did the theories of the sister-
hood. It just came down that way.
     So I saw the concern in Albert's face, a guy who
wanted to be a pillar of strength to some All-
American Gal, and it was hard not to cut him some
slack. Here we were, huddled down together in a dark,
smelly alley, ready to save the human race from all the
denizens of hell, and poor old Albert was concerned
about how I felt about his religion.
     A more elemental kind of man would just be trying
to put the make on me, arguing that the human race is
near extinction and let's make love while we can and
think about the future instead of the self, babe.
Not Albert. Not Fly. In completely different ways,
both these men were gentlemen. And Jill was a fine
young lady. I could have done a lot worse in choosing
companions for Armageddon.
     "Albert, I won't lie to you again. I do have a hang-
up about the Mormon Church; but it won't affect us. I
respect you, um, in spite of it."
     His voice was polite, if a little frosty: "Thank you. I
won't pressure you about it."
     Well, if I could tell Fly some of it, I didn't see why I
couldn't talk to the big Mormon. Again the thought
came to me that I could get more off my chest with
this relative stranger. As close as I was to Fly, my
platoon pal, there was a reticence with him I could
never shake.
     If I said to Fly that "there are some things you
wouldn't understand," he'd stare at me with his what
the hell are you talking about expression and make me
feel like a silly, emotional girl; he wouldn't do it
deliberately, but the result would be the same.
The truth was there were certain things I didn't
want to share with Fly. The reasons were emotional;
and those were never good enough reasons for him.
"Albert," I said, feeling the shape of his name as I
spoke it for the first time from a quiet place inside, "I
want to tell you about my brother."
     "I'll listen; but you don't have to if you don't--"
"He was never really what you'd call a real man; I
mean, I don't think he would have made a good
Marine. Had the bad luck to be really pretty . . . not
like a guy; I mean a girly-man kind of pretty. You
know, delicate features, pale skin, long, beautiful
lashes like a girl."
     "Big guy?"
"Yeah, right. When I was twenty, I outweighed him
by ten pounds--I mean, five kilograms . . . gotta be
military here."
     "Ow. That can be rough."
"It got worse. A lot of the older guys in the
theater--he did stage-crew stuff for the Spacelings--
they kind of came on to him. Real aggressive, gay
stuff; sometimes the theater can get like that, and
anybody who says it can't never did theater in L.A. or
New York. I don't even know if they were serious, or
of they just wanted to freak him; but Buddy--"
"Buddy?"
     "Heh, blame him for that. He was named Ambrose,
so he called himself Buddy. Buddy got real scared that
he was, you know, gay. It wouldn't have mattered if he
were; he would've said, 'Hey, like, that's it,' you
know? But he wasn't. He wasn't really anything; so he
totally bugged."
     "I don't know what to say. I've never had that
problem. I've always known I was a flaming hetero-
sexual."
     "So he kept always trying to prove his manhood
. . . you know, shoving little girls around, sticking his
zinger in any doughnut hole he could find. He even
once ..." I hesitated.
     "With you?" asked Albert, suddenly too perspica-
cious for words. Damn it.
     "It was pathetic; really negative zone. I took him
down so fast he cracked the sound barrier between
vertical and horizontal. And it wasn't too long after
that he fell in with a bad crowd and suddenly decided
he would convert to Mormonism."
     "What were you before that?"
"What do you expect? 'Sanders,' Episcopalian, as
close to the Church of England as you can get in the
U.S."
     "How long did he stay with us?"
"Eight months; he moved to SLC, moved back to
Hollywood half a year later. I think he showed up at
the Overland church a couple times, then found a new
savior: a drug called tank. Ever hear about it?"
"Nope. 'Fraid I'm not up on the drug culture . . .
not from the using perspective. Your brother's prob-
lems are his own making," said Albert. "Would you
fee! the same way about the Catholics or Lutherans or
Baptists, if he used them as a rest stop on the road to
hell?"
     That made me smile. "Albert, I had no idea you
were so eloquent! I admit I'm prejudiced; when I'm
thinking about it, I'm pissed at all organized religion;
but only the Mormons cut into my guts like that. I
think church enables aberrant behavior."
     Albert laughed, and I had to admit I sounded
pompous. "Temples too?" he asked.
     "Oh, right," I said. This man had debated at some
point in his life. "All religion, especially the ones that
pretend not to be. They all say theirs is a way of life or
an ethical system or a personal relationship with
God--it's only the other guy who has a religion."
"Arlene, I'd like to ask a favor of you. Please don't
tell Fly about our talk. I like things the way they are
right now between all of us. I don't want to do
anything to distract Taggart from doing the fine job
he's doing."
     "I keep confidences. You listened to my story, that's
all."
     He shifted his bulk against the wall so he could sit
more comfortably. "You mentioned your brother
getting involved with drugs. So did I, from the other
side. I don't like to talk about being a Marine sniper;
it's a private thing between me and the Lord. But one
week, I was assigned to kill a woman who was
suspected of being the primary money launderer for
the Abiera drug cartel in Colombia."
     "No great loss," I said, far too quickly.
He moved closer, as if he thought the monsters
might overhear and report his confessions to Satan
Central. "Arlene, I said she was suspected, not
proven."
     "Oh," was all I could think to say. I said it with
sincerity.
     "I'd never killed a woman before. They call it
termination, but it's killing. I don't make it easier by
playing with words."
     "There goes your career in the military," I said,
liking him better all the time. "So you were to
terminate this woman with extreme prejudice because
she was a suspect."
     He nodded, unable to speak for a moment. "Strong
suspect. But I had a lot of problems with it. It went
against my moral learning."
     I was having an attack of sarcasm and couldn't keep
it bottled up. I hit him with: "Killing all the suspects
in the hope you get the target? The Church of Central
Intelligence makes that a sacrament."
     "No, I mean killing a woman. In the end I decided
if I couldn't justify killing her, then how could I
justify killing a guy who was supposed to be a
renegade colonel from Stasi? I did him the month
before."
     "Now who's playing with words?"
"Killed him the month before. He was training
Shining Path terrorists to be sent over to Kefiristan to
help the Scythe. It came down to one thing: either I
trusted my superiors knew what they were doing, or I
didn't."
     He wanted to be frank with me, but the words
choked in his throat. I helped him along. "You killed
her," I said.
     "I killed her, yes. I still think she was guilty."
Suddenly, I chuckled. He looked at me as if I'd
completely lost my mind. "No, no, Albert, it's not
what you think. I'm laughing about all the trouble
America went to trying to protect fuck-ups like my
brother."
     My use of the past tense brought both of us back to
the immediate nightmare. "I think we're all sinners,"
he concluded. "We all deserve to die and be damned;
we earned that fate when we disobeyed the Lord.
Which is why we need the Savior. I take responsibility
for the blood on my hands, even if I let Him wash it
clean. I don't blame the Church, the Marines, my
parents, society, or anyone or anything else."
"We have a difference there, my friend," I told him.
"I blame God."
     "Then you blame the nature of things."
"Yeah, I guess I do. 'The nature of things' is waiting
for us beyond this alley with claws and horns, light-
ning and brimstone. My only regret is that I won't
meet God when I have a rocket launcher." I knew I
was getting worked up and discussing religion; but I
was talking to a human being, not the President of the
Twelve.
     And really, Arlene Sanders, are you sure you're not
trying to wash away the blood on your hands, the blood
of a whole compound of innocents who might die
because of your stupid mistake, sending a radio mes-
sage to co-opted Colonel Karapetian? I shuddered and
shut off the thought.
     "You can't blow up God, Arlene," he said in an
annoyingly tolerant tone of voice. I expected my
blasphemy would get more fire out of him.
     I tried one last time, while I still had my mad on:
"He made Himself flesh once, didn't He? If He'd do it
again ..."
     "I think you'd find the cross a heavier weapon to
carry than a bazooka, Arlene. Somehow I don't see
you nailing anyone to a cross."
     I almost told him about the row of crucified hell-
princes the pumpkins had used to adorn Deimos and
how I'd happily do the same; then I made myself shut
up instead. I'd said enough. More than enough. The
quiet, easy way he was dealing with my outburst told
me that Albert was a man of faith so strong I couldn't
crack it with a BFG. Besides, I had the feeling he
would start praying for me if I didn't cool it.
"Thank you for telling me about Colombia," I said.
"There's no one I'd rather talk to than you, Arlene.
Now let's get back to work."
     Damn if I wasn't becoming attracted to honest
Albert. For the first time in weeks, I thought about
Dodd, my guy, who was zombified; my lover
     whose body I put out of its misery.
A small glimmer of guilt tried to build up into a fire,
but I doused it with anger. We all had our problems.
We were all human. I was sick and tired of thinking
about all the things I did wrong or could have done
better. Humanity was not a weakness; it was a
strength, and our job was to win back our world, and
damn it, why did I hesitate to think "lover" when I
thought about Willie? Was it because it had the word
"love" in it?
     Darling Dan's Supermarket was the next battlefield.
The zombies finished unloading the crates of whatev-
er and drove off in the bread truck. Now the coast was
clear.
     "Come on," I said.
"Right behind you," he said.
     19
We slipped into the supermarket through the
     back delivery door and worked our way toward the
front. Lights were flickering on and off with the same
irritating strobe effect that Fly and I had to deal with
on Deimos so friggin' often. Maybe these guys weren't
sloppy, slovenly, indifferent creeps; maybe it was
some kind of aesthetic statement. All I knew was
flickering light gave me a headache and made me want
to unload a clip at the first refugee from Halloween
who happened across my path.
     "Come on," said Albert, a few steps ahead of me
now.
     I loved symmetry as much as the next guy. "Right
behind you," I quoted. It was the next best thing to
dancing with him.
     Inside the main part of the store, the fluorescent
lights were on and burning steady. But the refrigera-
tion was off, and there was a rotten smell of all kinds
of produce, milk, and meat that had been let go before
its time.
     "Ew," said my Mormon buddy, and he hit the
center of the bull's-eye. The meat smelled a lot worse
than the bad vegetable matter. And oh, that fish!
If I hadn't been wide awake on adrenaline--
     compared to which caffeine is harmless kid stuff--I
would never have believed what I saw next. Nothing
on Phobos or Deimos had the feeling of a fever dream
compared to the spectacle of...
     "Hell in the aisles," breathed Albert.
The grocery store was as busy as a Saturday after-
noon in the good old world. Mom and Dad and the
kids were there. Young lovers wandered the aisles.
Middle-class guys with middle-sized guts in ugly T-
shirts pushed shopping carts down the center aisle
with no regard for who got in the way. Nothing had
changed from the way it used to be ... except that
everyone was dead.
     Zombies on a shopping spree. Eyes never to blink
again. Mouths never to form words, but to drool foul-
smelling, viscous liquid worse than anything in an old
wino's stomach. Hands reaching out to grab anything
or anyone that fell in their path.
     The sour lemon odor was so concentrated that I had
trouble breathing and Albert's eyes were watering; my
throat was filling with something unpleasant.
The nearest zombie to us had been a big man once,
a football player would have been my guess. Thick
blue lines stretched across his face; I couldn't tell if
they were veins or grooves or painted on. Next to him
stumbled the remains of a cheerleader whose long
hair she'd probably taken good care of a long time ago
in the world lost way, way back ... in the previous
month. The zombie girl's hair looked like spiders had
tangled themselves up in their own webs and died on
her head.
     These two were the best-looking zombie couple.
The nearest family was disgusting; especially the
thirteen-year-old boy (what had been a thirteen-year-
old boy). Part of his head was missing. It looked
melted, as if a big wad of caramel had been left out in
the sun and gone bad on one side.
     A thin, bald man looked like a scarecrow with a
laughing skull on top. His right cheek was missing and
the few teeth that hadn't fallen out on that side made
me think of kernels of uneaten corn or keys on an
unpolished piano.
     Two zombie Girl Scouts carried filthy boxes in their
pale hands. One dropped a box and several fingers
spilled out. A man dressed as an undertaker fell to his
knees and shoveled the fingers into his mouth where
they stuck out like pale worms. A dead priest groped
at the attache case of a dead account executive over a
pile of fish left to rot on the floor. The zombie odor
was so pronounced that I could barely smell the week-
old fish.
     "Are you all right?" asked Albert. I nodded but
didn't look at him. "You're staring at them."
Albert's words were like an echo from Fly. My old
buddy always gave good advice, like not focusing on
any details that wouldn't help the mission. But this
was the first time I'd seen so many of these human
caricatures this close when I wasn't engaged in taking
them apart.
     "I'm okay," I whispered, pulling Albert back in the
shadows. "We're doing fine. The stink in here is so
bad they couldn't smell out live humans to save
their--"
     "Lives," he finished my inappropriate image.
"Let's get the lemons and get out of here."
     There's never any arguing with good sense. But as
we took another look-see, the zombie density inside
the store was worse than a minute ago. "Where the
hell are they all coming from?" I asked.
     "Probably," Albert agreed.
The scene was becoming even more surreal. Zom-
bies pushing baskets up and down the aisles, grabbing
cans and boxes of junk food (which would take a lot
more than the end of the world to go bad). Some of
the zombies were engaged in what seemed to be
purposeful activity, moving items from one shelf to
another and then back again.
     They didn't eat any of the groceries. They seemed
caught up in the behavior of the past, as if the
program had been so hard-wired into their skulls that
not even losing their souls could erase the ritual of
going to the grocery store.
     And then suddenly the lights went out. Whatever
had kept the generator going was defunct. "What do
we do now?" asked Albert.
     "Take advantage of the situation," I said. "This is
fortuitous. We should have put the generator out
ourselves. We can pass easier for zombies if they don't
see us. They're too stupid to do anything about the
dark."
     If there is ever a Famous Last Words Award, I'm
sure that I'll receive sufficient votes to make the final
ballot. No sooner had I made my confident assess-
ment than flickering, yellow light filled the store.
Dozens of candles were lit. I could imagine Fly saying,
in his I-told-you-so tone of voice, "If they can still
shoot their weapons, they can do a lot of other
things."
     It was bad enough when Fly was right so often in
person. Now I was carrying him around in my head to
tell me when I made a mistake!
     Not everything the zombies lit was a normal can-
dle. Some gave off a heavy smell of burning butter or
fat. I didn't want to think about some of the items
they might be using for torches.
     "I wonder how long before they burn the store
down," said Albert.
     "They haven't yet," I said. "Let's get those lemons
and get the hell out of here!" As we went out into the
throng, my heart was pounding so hard that I worried
some of the creatures would hear it. Then they
wouldn't need to smell us out or see our TV-
commercial-smooth complexions to turn us into
today's lunch special.
     Matches still flared as zombies looked for items to
light up. A "Price-Buster" banner suddenly caught
fire and went up in flames. It didn't set anything else
on fire. For the first and probably last time in my life, I
was grateful to be among zombies at that moment.
Real, live human beings would have freaked and
caused a panic more dangerous than a fire. The
zombies didn't care. And of course they didn't bat an
eye.
     To be fair to Fly, he never overestimated zombies;
he just didn't want me underestimating them. For
what Albert and I had to do now, we had to count on
zombie stupidity. I made my way over to a pile of
hand baskets and took one. Albert stuck behind me a
lot closer than Peter Pan's shadow.
     I passed him the basket and noticed that his hands
were shaking. I sure didn't blame him. In fact, I had
the strong feeling that he'd be doing a lot better in full
combat against the monsters. With his religious back-
ground, bodies of the reanimated dead had to be
heavy stuff.
     If I remembered correctly, and I always do, the
Mormons had a more old-fashioned idea of the body.
One thing I could give Fly's nuns--the Catholic
Church didn't make you worry about what happened
to your body in a war zone if your soul was in good
shape. The more spiritual the faith, the more popular
I figured it would be in the atomic age, where we can
all be zapped out of existence in the pulse of a
nucleus.
     20
Albert's fear sort of made me more daring.
     After I got my award for Famous Last Words, I'd use
it to join Psychos 'R' Us. This situation was so insane
that I started to think it might work.
     We turned a corner and saw a zombie-woman
sitting on the ground. She had two candles, a bag of
charcoal, and a cigarette lighter; four items, two
hands. She couldn't decide which two items to hold.
So she kept picking up two of them, dropping them,
and picking up another random pair.
     I looked over at Albert and tried a little telepathy.
As usual, the results were nothing to worry the
neighborhood skeptics. Since Albert wasn't picking
up on my silent message, I stepped forward and
waited for my opportunity. The next time the
zombie-girl dropped her candle and lighter, I simply
reached down and picked them up.
     Now that I'd solved the zombie's quandary, she got
up and stumbled vaguely down the aisle with the
other candle and the charcoal. I started to pass the
lighter to Albert, then changed my mind and gave him
the candle, which I lit. I preferred keeping the thing
that actually made fire.
     Playing somewhere in the back of my head were all
those old horror movies where the one thing monsters
fear is fire. When I was a kid, sneaking those movies
late at night when everyone else was asleep, I never
thought I was boning up on documentaries. At least I
hadn't used a hammer and stake yet in fighting these
bastards; but I intended to keep my options open.
We staggered down the aisle, trying to look suitably
undead, and headed for the produce section. We
quickly grabbed plastic bags and filled them with the
most disgusting remains of lemons and limes we
could find.
     The limes weren't even a little green any longer;
they were dull gray with black splotches. Although the
lemons were still yellowish in spots, the other colors
were dark and unwholesome. They were the sort of
colors I preferred ignoring.
     Other zombies began gathering around us and just
standing there. Maybe our purposeful actions were
too purposeful. Did these idiots have the brains to
recognize nonzombie behavior?
     I tried to think and look stupid, but that wasn't
what was required. Pretending to be mindless is much
more difficult. I let my mouth hang open and tried to
work up a good supply of drool. Albert picked up on
the idea ... the fact I found him immediately con-
vincing shouldn't be taken as a put-down. But, man,
did he look the part when he put on his goggle-eyed
stare.
     The act seemed to help a little. Some of the zombies
left us alone and found other things to stare at. One
large black man--what had been a black man--
dressed as a high school coach, continued to block our
way, staring at the basket of rotting produce instead of
us. He started to get on my nerves. When I moved
either to the right or left, he shifted slightly . . . just
enough to suggest he was willing to block us if we
wanted to move up the aisle.
     We might very well want to move up the aisle
because the crowd was starting to press in behind us,
cutting off that avenue of escape. I couldn't remember
if we had closed the door behind us when we sneaked
in the back. Other zombies could be coming in that
way, dead feet shuffling forward, guided by dead
brains to regain a fragment of the living past.
A sound came out of nowhere. It was so strange that
I didn't even associate it with the walking corpses
hemming us in. It was sort of a low mewling sound,
coming deep from within chests where no heart beat.
A humming, rasping, empty, lost, mournful, aching
sound ... a chorus of the damned calling out to any
living humans left in the world, as if to say:
Come join us; life's not so good! Come and be with
us. We are lonely for company. You can still be
yourselves. The habits of a lifetime do not disappear
only because life has spilled out. If you loaded a
weapon in life, you can still do it in death; the routine
will survive; all that will be burned away is the constant
worry to prove yourself, make distinctions, show pride.
Judge not; there is no point when you're dead.
I wanted to scream. I wanted to take my 10mm and
start firing, and keep firing until I'd wiped them all
from the surface of the Earth. Aboveground was for
the living! The dead belonged underground, feeding
the worms, who still had a function to perform.
The zombies were the pure mob, devoid of intelli-
gence and personality. Staring at them in their own
flickering candlelight, trying to pass, reminded me
how much I hated Linus Van Pelt, who said he loved
mankind, it was people he couldn't stand. Earlier, I
read a book by H. L. Mencken, who said he had no
love for the human race as a whole, but only for
individuals.
     Individuals. The whole point of evolution. Individ-
uals. The only justification for the American revolu-
tion, for capitalism, for love. There were only two
individuals in this cemetery that used to be a grocery
store, and I was one. The other gestured at me that the
basket of rotten citrus was full and we should be
leaving, if we could find a path through the wall of
pale, stinking, shambling flesh.
     Albert took the lead. He picked up one of the limes
and threw it up the aisle. It was a long shot, but it paid
off when an ancient memory reached out fingers like a
groping zombie and touched something in the coach's
brain. He turned and shambled after the lime like it
was a thrown ball.
     We followed in the wake left by the big zombie
pushing through the crowd. By the time the coach
reached the lime, he had forgotten about us, which is
saying it stronger than I intend. We were merely a
series of impressions, of light and sound distracting
the zombie for a brief moment.
     The front door beckoned. It was standing wide
open, so we didn't have to worry about the power. A
fire was burning somewhere down the street, marking
the path we would take if we made it outside.
Our last obstacle was the long line at the checkout,
believe it or not. A zombie-woman stood at the cash
register, responding to old job conditioning as the
others had fallen into the role of shoppers. She stood
behind the counter, banging on the keys of the register
with a clenched fist. The sight was too much, too
friggin' bizarre even after all that we had seen. I
laughed. It wasn't very loud, and I managed to choke
it off at about the half-chuckle point.
     But it drew attention.
Maybe the shred of a brain that still functioned
inside the ex-cashier's head was back from its coffee
break, but she stopped banging the keys and looked at
me. Then she opened her mouth, disgorging a cock-
roach that had been making its home there. A gap in
her neck revealed the probable entrance to the bug
condo.
     Then the bitch made a sound. It was a brand-new
sound, a kind of high wailing that drew the attention
of the others. She was doing a call to arms, and the
wandering eyes, listless bodies, jerking limbs, and
empty heads responded.
     They finally noticed us.
"Run!" I shouted, and I didn't have to tell Albert
twice. There weren't very many between us and the
door. Albert used his bulk to good advantage, and
while he cleared the path I readied the AB-10.
I waited until we were through the door before
spinning around to take care of business. Sure
enough, some of the zombies of higher caliber fol-
lowed us through the door. I expressed my admiration
for their brain power by answering with my machine
pistol.
     It felt good to be killing them again. Most of the
zombies in the grocery store didn't have weapons, but
the ones who followed us outside were armed. I
always thought there was a link between intelligence
and defending yourself; apparently it even applied at
this almost animalistic level. The zombies returned
fire.
     Albert saw I was in trouble and ran back to me, Uzi
ready. "Keep running, it's all right!" I shouted as he
took down a pair of Mom and Dads who took turns
unloading the family shotgun in our direction. As
they collapsed in a heap, other zombies I had shot got
back up, fumbling with their weapons. Before they
could get off another round, zombies coming up
behind them fired, and the bullets tore into the front
line of zombies. We booked.
     The "Fly" tactic worked its magic; the front rank
spun to return fire against their clumsy compadres. By
the time we got behind a row of munched cars
"parked" by the curb, the zombie melee was in full
cry.
     A bunch of spinys appeared from somewhere and
had their hands, or claws, full trying to stop the melee.
"Good job," I said in Albert's ear.
     "The Lord's work," he said, smiling. "I didn't
know they were such a contentious lot." He quoted a
line, I don't know if from the regular Bible or the
Book of Mormon: "Satan stirreth them up continu-
ally to anger one with another."
     "You said it, brother."
We had to get back to Fly and Jill; they'd be able to
hear the ruckus and would wonder what hornet's nest
we'd stirred up. And it was nearly 2200.
     I thought about Albert as we made time. There was
a lot more to this beefy Mormon than I'd first
expected. Fly and I had done all right when he joined
our team, or we joined his. I'd bet on all of us, even
Jill.
     The reasoning part of my brain ran the odds and
concluded that we were screwed. It had done the
same on Deimos where Fly and I had beaten the
odds so often as to give a bookie a nervous break-
down. That was with just two top-of-the-line hu-
man beings against boxes of monsters. Now with
four of us, we had the boxes of monsters badly out-
numbered.
     Albert and I entered the alley that felt like home
after the grocery store. One advantage of fighting
monsters was not having to worry about identifica-
tion and who-goes-there games. There was a certain
gait to a running human that the zombies lacked.
They forgot a lot about being human.
     Fly sighed and shook his head, somehow managing
to say "I can't take you anywhere!" and "welcome
back" simultaneously without speaking a word. We
were together again.
     21
Damn, I was glad to see Arlene again. After
     all we'd been through together, survival was getting to
be a habit. If reality took her away from me in blood
and fire, I wouldn't mourn until I'd finished avenging
her on the entire race of alien monsters. If by some
miracle I was still alive when it was over and she
wasn't, I would mourn for the rest of my life. Maybe
she felt the same, but I couldn't afford to think about
that.
     As Albert dropped the grocery basket of rotting
lemons right in front of Jill--who made one of her
patented "ick" sounds--he tossed a quick glance
back at Arlene, and it seemed to Yours Truly that the
aforesaid returned it with interest. Compound inter-
est. Well, stranger things had happened, especially
lately. But I would never have imagined any chemis-
try between . . . well, it didn't bother me if something
were cooking between them. All that mattered was the
mission, I told myself.
     "That caterwaul was you?"
"Like the good old days," said Arlene, "when we
were young and carefree against a bloodred Mars
filling up the sky."
     "Huh?" said Jill.
"Uh," said Albert.
     When Arlene waxed poetic, she was a happy camp-
er. "Mission went well, did it?" I asked. "All right,
let's apply the beauty treatment."
     Albert bravely set the example, squashing several of
the lemons and a lonely lime between his big hands
then applying the result to his face. Arlene followed
suit, and I, after taking a deep breath, dug in. There
were plenty to go around. Then I noticed that Jill was
hanging back.
     "You're going to have to do this," I told her in my
friendly voice.
     "Yeah, yeah, I know," she said, only the second
time she'd pulled the sullen bit around us. I could well
imagine her giving this treatment to the President of
the Twelve full-time. I wouldn't fault her for that.
"It's not that bad," said Arlene, rubbing one down
the side of her own leg. Staining camo wear was a
nonproblem.
     "Okay, okay," Jill said, picking one up and tenta-
tively applying it to her nose. "It's gross," she said
with heartfelt sincerity.
     "Here, let me help," I said, becoming impatient. I
took a lemon in each hand, squeezed, and then began
rubbing the results in her hair.
     "Hey!" she said, backing away.
"No time to be belle of the ball," I snapped,
continuing the operation on her face.
     "Hey!" said Arlene, coming over, taking one of the
lemons out of my hands and brandishing it under my
nose as if it were a live grenade. "What do you think
you're doing?"
     "Doing my bit for truth, justice, and the American
way."
     "Uh-huh," said Arlene, reeking of a lack of convic-
tion. "Fly Taggart, I need to explain this to you so that
you will understand." Smiling pleasantly, Arlene
stomped on my right foot.
     While I was digesting all the implications of her
argument, she whispered in my ear, "She's a woman,
not a child."
     "Don't treat me like a child!" Jill chimed in, as if
she could hear.
     "Don't act like one." I leaned close, ignoring
Arlene, and spoke to Jill as I would to one of my
squadron Marines who was acting out. "Listen up,
ma'am. When you've got a set of butter bars, you can
start thinking and making decisions. But until then,
you do what / say, and / say this stuff is going on now.
"We've done your hair and face; next step is the rest
of your body. You want to do that yourself, or do you
want to give me a thrill by having me do it?"
She stared, then took the lime I held out. Test time
was over for now.
     We finished applying the lemons. Jill made faces
but did fine; I hoped she wouldn't stay pissed for the
rest of the mission. Arlene lemoned the backs of the
rest of us where we couldn't reach, and then I did the
same for her. After that, we bid farewell to our alley
and moved out.
     Albert took point and led us toward the railway
station. I took the rear. Fortunately, now that we
smelled like zombies, we could walk openly and carry
our weapons. We rounded a corner and found our-
selves in a mob of the previously mentioned. I could
see Arlene start to tense up--understandable after
what she and Albert encountered at the grocery store.
But a moment later she was putting on a good act,
probably better than mine.
     For a moment I worried about Jill's performance:
arms straight out like a bad copy of Frankenstein's
monster, legs too stiff and jerking as she walked . . .
too exaggerated. She'd never make it on the legitimate
stage. But the zombies didn't seem to notice.
We passed through an archway and suddenly we
were surrounded by imps, hell-princes, and bonys,
with those damned rocket launchers strapped to their
backs. I watched the bonys walk with a jerking
motion so bad I could imagine strings pulling them as
if they were the puppet skeletons I'd seen in Mexico
during their "Day of the Dead" festival. If I hadn't
already seen one in action in the truck, I'd think they
were fake. One thing: they gave me new appreciation
for Jill's performance as a zombie.
     Then came that lousy moment when the Forces of
Evil unveiled yet another brand new, straight-off-the-
assembly-line monster. This one wasn't inadvertently
funny in the manner of the bonys. This one was just
plain disgusting.
     The word fat barely described the awfulness of this
sphere of flesh. We passed close enough to smell years
of accumulated sweat, a neat trick considering how
new the model had to be. The thing made me think of
a planetoid trapped in Earth's gravitational field, only
this hunk of flesh comprised fold upon fold of nause-
ating, ugly, yellow, dripping, flaccid chicken flab.
Of course, that was only a first impression. As it
came still closer, I decided that it was a lot worse than
I first imagined.
     All I could think of was a gigantic wad of phlegm
carved by flabby hands into a semblance of the
human form with two beady pig's eyes sunk deep into
the grotesque face. At the end of each tree-trunk arm
was a massive metal gun, starting at the elbow.
In a choice between being blasted by those guns or
touched in any way, there was no contest. I could
imagine a lot of names for the thing, and I was sure
Arlene would have some ideas; but I wanted Jill to
have the honor of naming this one. She'd probably
come up with a better name than the different terms
for excrement unrolling in my mind.
     There were plenty of other monsters and zombies
through all this, more than enough to keep us all on
our toes and plenty scared. But this thing was just too
much for my stomach.
     The two steam-demons looming up before us were
more dangerous; but there was something almost
beautiful about them in comparison. They were well-
shaped, with good muscle tone showing on the parts
of them that were flesh instead of machine. Even their
metal parts seemed clean and shiny compared to the
dingy, rusty-looking metal tubes sticking out of that
fatboy. I knew I was in trouble when I started making
aesthetic judgments about the monsters.
     I didn't like the way the zombies hemmed us in. I
pushed left and right, trying to lead my troops out,
but always shying away from the vigilant hell-princes
and bonys; they kept getting underfoot. . . whenever
I'd try to ghost, there they were.
     It took some moments for the penny to drop: we
were being herded like cattle. By the time I realized it,
it was too late to get out; the zombie mass funneled
together, headed toward a large building. My heart
went into overdrive, and I was already starting to
calculate the odds of bolting, when Albert leaned
close and rumbled into my ear, "Here's some luck--
they're driving us into the train station."
     I looked, and by God if he wasn't right. They were
putting us on a bloody train!
     A man's heart deviseth his way: but the Lord
directeth his steps.
     The only possible fly in the ointment would be if
the damned train were headed east; but I had a gut
feeling it was headed straight into Los Angeles.
We couldn't avoid the steam-demons; they were
standing at the boarding ramp to the open cattle car
that was already starting to fill. Well, we'd decided to
take the first opportunity to get aboard, and this
surely was some sort of sign.
     Those old nuns of mine were receiving a lot of
prayers from me lately. I could never imagine saints
or angels; so when I got in one of these moods, those
withered souls in black and gray habits played across
my memory. I used to think the nuns that taught me
were ugly old crones. With what I'd been seeing lately,
they had taken on a new beauty in my mind's eye.
My prayer was simple. Don't let fatboy get on with
us, please; pretty please with a Hail Mary on it.
It was easy to stay together; there wasn't any room
to be separated. We were packed in like the Tokyo
subway at rush hour. Of course, I realized that if we
were separated, we'd have the devil's own time trying
to get back together.
     When all this was over, I thought I might give
religion another shake; as the door to the cattle car
closed, I saw that we weren't going to have to put up
with fatboy: it got onto another car.
     "It's open in the back!" said Jill in surprise. At first
I made to silence her for fear we would attract
attention, but there was so much noise going on
around us that our words wouldn't be noticed over
the roaring and growling filling the narrow space. We
were being pushed toward the rear of the car, where
instead of a solid wall, there was an arrangement of
vertical wooden posts with horizontal metal slats
running through them.
     "That's some window," Arlene commented.
"I see that none of you were brought up around
livestock," I said caustically. "It's a cattle car."
With a grinding sound, the train started forward
with a great lurch, throwing us into our rearward
neighbors, who growled and pushed us back. The
former humans who were now zombies did not be-
have nearly so well as humans would have; some
responded to being jostled by firing off a few shots.
"Great!" shouted Arlene.
     "If this escalates, we'll be wiped out in here!" I
hollered back.
     "What can we do about it?"
"Nothing!" I admitted. Time again to trust to luck.
The nuns must have been working overtime, because
the shots suddenly ceased. I glanced over and saw
Albert with his eyes closed, moving his lips silently. I
supposed that if praying was going to save us, this was
a job for the pro.
     Jill grabbed the back of my pants; it was a good
idea--I grabbed Arlene, and she caught Albert.
We traveled past several small towns that evidently
held little of interest. The night sky had a weird glow,
but I still preferred it to the return of day, if that
sickening green sky was waiting for us. It was too dark
to make out details, but occasionally we saw fires
burning on the horizon, funeral pyres to mark the
passing of humanity. We finally came to a violent stop
and there was more jostling. Our luck was still with
us; the gunshots did not resume.
     "Damn, I wish we could see through the door," I
said. Behind us was a splendid view of a smashed
building and a nice stretch of barren countryside; but
heavy sounds in front of us indicated some action.
"The designers must not care if the cows are well-
informed," said Arlene.
     As if in answer to my request, the heavy wooden
door in the side of the train was pushed open to
unpack some zombies, and we were greeted by a sight
you don't see every day. A contingent of steam-
demons was being herded by a spidermind. They were
guarding what appeared to be a truck dolly in which a
human form was wrapped up in bandages from head
to toe. There was a slit for his eyes, but that didn't
help tell us anything about the man or woman
propped up on the dolly; we could only assume this
was a human because there were straps across the
figure--a dead giveaway that he was a prisoner.
The sight made me remember Bill Ritch. The only
human they would take care to preserve with his mind
intact was a human with knowledge they needed and
couldn't extract without destroying . . . which meant
that here was someone else we should either rescue or
kill. He couldn't be left in the hands of the enemy,
giving them whatever they needed. They marched
forward out of sight, the steam-demons tramping in
eerie, mechanical lockstep.
     "Are you thinking what I'm thinking?" Arlene
bellowed at me.
     "Loud and clear!"
"They've got their tentacles on another of our tech
lads!"
     "Listen up!" I screamed. "Have plan!" They gave
me their undivided attention, easy to do in such
cramped quarters. "Grab guy! Run!"
     Arlene rolled her eyes, unimpressed.
"How--move?" shouted Jill.
     "Slowly!"
While we considered the strengths and weaknesses
of our position, the monsters took the bandaged figure
toward the front of the train. Although we couldn't
see very well, it was easy to figure out what happened
next.
     The train started up again, having received its
important cargo.
     "Forward!" I screamed. "Make path!"
Jill wriggled her hand slowly out to where she was
able to extend her fingers and ... the best way to
describe it was that she goosed the zombie-woman in
front of her. The nervous system of a zombie isn't
great shakes compared to when it was alive, but there
were sufficient sparks left to kindle into fire.
The zombie-woman didn't jump or make any sort
of exclamation; but she did move forward with suffi-
cient force to dislodge the smaller male taking up
space right in front of her.
     Jill let Albert get in front of her. He had a lot of
mass and widened Jill's narrow opening. The ob-
jective was clear: push forward to the connection
between the cars. With the speed of a snail we
inched forward. I figured that so long as we didn't piss
off any of them enough to shoot at us, we were doing
all right.
     Just about then, one of the zombies took a potshot.
I didn't see any particular reason for it; but what was I
doing, trying to apply reason to zombie behavior?
The bullet struck another zombie in the throat, and
it went down gurgling. We were packed so tightly, like
Norwegian sardines, that further attempts at argu-
ment by projectile would probably annihilate the
population of the cattle car.
     Jill drew the small .38 caliber revolver we'd given
her and looked scared and determined both at the
same time.
     "Hold your fire, Jill!" I shouted. She didn't make
me repeat it. The zombie with the itchy finger kept
firing wildly and suddenly connected with a point
where a metal slat and wooden post came together. A
heavy zombie near to the point of impact fell back
against the weakened spot and suddenly went right
through, leaving a huge hole big enough for even
Albert to fit through.
     "New plan!" I bellowed.
22
     By now the train was up to speed again,
smoking along at 300, 320 kilometers per hour. At
this speed, the wind could be considered a refreshing
deluxe feature for the typical bovine passenger. As I
attempted to squirm through the opening, I quickly
learned that a typhoon-strength head wind could slow
down the most dedicated Marine.
     The main thing was not to drop my shotgun as I
climbed on the sill, leaned out into the hurricane, and
stretched up until I reached the railing along the
outside top of the train. I hoped the zombies wouldn't
pay any attention to this latest change in their envi-
ronment. At some level they were still human enough
to resent this ridiculous crowding, or they wouldn't be
exchanging shots. Maybe our team would rate zombie
gratitude for giving them elbow room.
     While standing on the sill, leaning forward into the
wind, holding the railing, I reached down to help
Arlene. Her slim, dry hand slipped into my sweaty
paw, and I noted that it was cold. Arlene always had
trouble keeping her extremities warm. I hoisted her
out and up to the roof, where she hooked her legs to
hang on so she could lean back down. Then Arlene
helped me take care of Jill.
     I didn't blame Jill for being terrified. But I was
surprised when she started shaking. Or maybe it was
just the train rocking violently back and forth. I guess
this would be an experience to write home about, if
there were still a home. No matter how brave and
grown-up this fourteen-year-old wanted to be, she was
having one wild-ass situation after another thrown at
her and had to handle each without benefit of
training.
     The terror in her eyes didn't prevent her doing what
she had to do, and I didn't pay attention to the tears.
The angle was bad, but Jill weighed almost nothing--
and I heaved a sigh of relief as I finished handing her
up to Arlene.
     Albert was a problem. He was a big guy and not as
gymnastically oriented as Yours Truly. Arlene and Jill
attached webbing to the railing, then attached it to
Arlene. The webbing is extraordinarily strong, able to
hold tons before ripping. We didn't go into hell
without taking some decent equipment! No way was
Arlene going to fall with that stuff on her.
Now Arlene and I could help Albert up. It was a lot
easier than blowing away a steam-demon.
     We might even have enjoyed our time on the roof if
not for the hurricane head wind. It smelled a whole
lot better than inside.
     We lay on our bellies, and a ferocious gale battered
us. But we weren't blown off; in fact, we could stand
shakily, leaning into the wind. I figured there must be
some sort of air dam up front, otherwise, 300 kph
would have swatted a standing man off the top of that
train like finger-flicking a fly.
     "Listen up!" I shouted against the gale. "Single-file!
Forward! Slowly! Don't fall!"
     Arlene put her mouth right up to my ear. "How far
L.A.?"
     "Two hours--dawn--rescue human or kill him!"
"What?" screamed Jill, clearly horrified. She was
plenty loud enough to be heard. There was no need to
explain to two old soldiers like Arlene and Albert. I'd
stopped thinking of Jill as a young teen, but there was
no getting around the fact that she was a civilian.
"Death better than fate!" God only knew how
     much she heard, but she clenched her teeth and said
nothing more. The brutal arithmetic inside my head
could wait for another time; I hoped she would never
have to decide who lives and who dies. Sometimes I
envy civilians.
     There was nothing else to say. Besides, we'd all be
hoarse from shouting if we didn't shut up.
     I went first; it was my party. I set the pace nice and
slow. It took nearly a quarter hour to crawl the length
of the train; fortunately, the track through Arizona
was pretty straight. But the natural swaying of the cars
could still hurl any of us to certain death; the rails
were laid for cargo, not passengers.
     I looked back frequently; we didn't lose anybody.
Next stop: Relief City! Two cars ahead was the flatcar
with a complement of one spidermind, one steam-
demon, and one human wrapped like a Christmas
mummy and strapped down tight. The spidermind
was between us and the human, the steam-demon on
the other side.
     It occurred to me that these superior examples of
alien monster-building might sniff us out better than
the lesser breeds; and the wind did a lot to erase our
lemon odor. In our favor, we were way downwind.
The wind was so damned loud, I didn't think they
could hear us either.
     I gestured to Arlene. Time for the Deimos veterans
to do their stuff. We crawled closer, where I could see
a very narrow gap between the cars . . . too narrow
for the adults.
     I noted the fact that the spidermind was so big, a
couple of its right feet dangled limply over the side of
the flatcar . . . and that gave me an idea.
     But it was too narrow for the adults. Only Jill could
fit.
     Oh man, this was my nightmare come true. It was
never supposed to be a walk for the kid--but this?
Throw the raw recruit, not even driving age yet, into
the meat grinder against a spidermind and a steam-
demon? It was criminal . . . homicidal!
     But what were the options? Not even Arlene could
squeeze into that slender space; she probably out-
weighed Jill by forty pounds. They were like two
different species, and thinking of me or Albert down
there was a joke.
     Feeling my gut clench, as well as another part of my
anatomy, I said to myself: Time for the recruit to do
her stuff.
     The levity didn't work. I still felt sick.
We crawled back and huddled with the others in the
gap between two cattle cars full of zombies, where we
could hear each other, at least. I felt like a class-A
creep giving Jill her assignment; but nobody else
could do it. Anyway, the kid seemed eager, not afraid.
She'd make a good Marine. Did I say that before?
This time, my plan had more details: Jill would
shimmy down into the tiny gap between the two cars,
using some of the webbing. "Just like Spider-man!"
she said. Well, whatever. We'd use all the positive
fantasy images floating in her mind. She had to
believe in herself absolutely to pull this off.
If they spotted Jill, she'd be dead meat, and the rest
of us with her. Once she made it into the gap, she
would very carefully loop the webbing several times
over the nearest limb of the spidermind and pull it
tight--without allowing the spidermind to notice it
was being hobbled. She would attach the other end of
the webbing to the titanium grappling hook the Presi-
dent had included in Albert's gear. We could do that
before she started out. We'd lose the hook and some
of our webbing, but with luck, we'd lose the
spidermind as well.
     "If she makes it that far," I said, wrapping up, "she
drops the hook to the ground beneath the wheels and
ducks, waiting for it to catch on a tie or something."
"And that gross bug gets yanked off!" she said,
grokking the plan immediately. "Gnarly idea, Fly!"
I let her savor the image of the alien brain scattered
across the countryside. Slamming into the car behind
at better'n 300 per ought to do the trick nicely, and
"Spider-ma'am" would defeat the spider creep with a
thick dose of poetic justice.
     Now all we had to do was make it work.
While Arlene and Albert prepared the hook and
line, Jill let me wrap it around her waist. She asked
me to do it personally. That meant a lot to me. Then I
gave her a gentle push forward and hoped Albert's
God wouldn't choose this moment to desert us. I put
in a good word for Jill with the nuns as well.
Jill climbed down the side of the car we were on,
two cars back from the flatcar. So far, so good. I
climbed down after her.
     We crept forward at wheel level, crawling alongside
spinning death so slowly, it made our previous trek
along the roof seem like a drag race. Mother Mary, I
thought, please don't let there be any fence posts too
close to the tracks!
     We very carefully worked our way around the
wheels; but if we were any higher up the train, the
spidermind might have us in its sights. Hunkering
down at wheel level, we were hidden by the side of the
car itself.
     There was enough light to keep Jill in my personal
viewfinder every step of the way. I imagined her
knuckles were white. Mine sure as hell were. I kept
pressed right up against her back, my arms on either
side of hers to make sure she didn't slip. We finally got
to the edge of the flatcar; now the show was entirely
Jill's, and all I could do was hang and wait.
23
     Cheese and rice, I felt like a weenie when he
took me outside the train. I swore myself I wouldn't
eff-up any more. For the mome, Fly respected me, and
Arlene too. I didn't care so much about Albert, but he
was all right for one of the LDs.
     Now was my chance to prove to everyone! Maybe I
almost wrecked the truck when those missiles went
through, and maybe they don't know how close they
came to being hosed. But if I pulled this off, I'd make
up for everything! Plus I'd pay back one of those
crawly bastards for what they did to my mom. And
Dad.
     He was right, the slot was a tight fit, even for me;
but I could wiggle through. I don't know what they
would have done without me for this. As I slid along, I
got grease on me. Gagged me out at first, but then I
was glad, cuz it made me more slippery. Huh, like to
see one of those wimp LD girls do this! She'd faint,
and the human race would lose the war.
     Suddenly, I saw a thin, silver thing sticking over the
edge. Got wide on the end. I didn't recognize it at
first, seeing it so close up. Then I gasped--it was a
spidermind foot! It was bigger than I thought. It was
bigger than / was!
     The end of the foot fluffed out like bell-bottom
pants, like my grandparents wore, like on the Brady
Bunch. God, I was glad they didn't live to see the
monsters kill their children.
     I stretched, flipping the webbing, trying to loop the
foot; but I couldn't reach that far! That PO'ed me--I
was going to dweeb-out just cuz my arms weren't like
an orangutan's.
     Then the leg twitched. I screamed and jumped--
and fell.
     I slipped down, banging my knee and barely catch-
ing the edge of the flat thing . . . my face was an inch
from the tracks.
     Oh Lord--the wind blew off the ties, freezing my
cheeks, and I smelled smoke. I think I even . . . well,
peed my pants. Shaking like a leaf, I hauled myself
back up. I spared a glance back at Fly; he looked like
he might have peed his pants too. I shrugged--sorry!
I'm sorry, but hacking systems would never seem
serious after this. Just a toy. This was real. I knew I
was taking a big chance, but there was no way else to
reach the foot: I rested my knee on the bed of the
flatcar and stretched higher, and then I could reach
the leg.
     The spider moved again! I wasn't able to get back
down before the leg pinned me back against the
firewall of the car behind. I was stuck like a fly in the
spidermind's web.
     I didn't make a sound; I could barely breathe, but I
didn't panic this time--I didn't have any you-know-
what left. It didn't know I was there ... so I hung.
It would kill me the second it realized I was there,
same way I'd crush a bug; I was still alive because I
was hidden from view by the huge leg itself. 'Course,
it might kill me without ever knowing I was there; if it
put its weight on that foot, it would pulverize me.
The place where it had me firmest against the wall
was at my knee. The upper part of my body could still
move. I still had a good reach. So I did what I came to
do. I didn't let myself think what would happen if I
failed.
     I passed the webbing four times around the leg. My
heart froze each time. I was in Girl Scouts once; the
only thing they taught me that I still remember was
how to tie a square knot. I tied the best buggin' square
knot of my whole life!
     Great. What next? Next you die, girl.
I thought I would cry, but my eyes were dry. My
mouth was parched and my heart raced, but that was
all. When I thought about all the stupid things we cry
about, like boys and grades and losing a best girl-
friend, it seemed strange I didn't cry then.
Then something happened inside. I felt calm for the
first time since I saw the monsters. I didn't mind
dying if I could take one bastard with me. A big one.
I unslung the grappling hook and let it dangle
between the cars. Pinned against the wall, I wouldn't
be able to duck down. Once I dropped the hook, the
spider would be yanked to a stop as the train kept
moving, and I would be crushed to a grease smear.
Thought about my new friends. Thought about
     what if Fly had kissed me. Thought about wishing I
was anywhere else. Then I let go of the hook.
24
     I didn't know what was going on with Jill,
couldn't see a thing. She fell and screamed, and I'd
popped around and seen her half under the track;
then the spidermind shifted and I had to leap back.
Now I didn't dare show myself--I'd get us both
killed.
     I thought Jill would have finished by now. I'd bet
money she wouldn't lose her nerve. Either she was
still waiting for an opening, or something had gone
wrong.
     Then I heard the heavy thud and metal-scraping
sound that could only be the hook dropping under the
train. It bounced up and down, over and over, while I
waited and waited and waited for that big mother
with the brain and the legs to be yanked into oblivion.
What happened next was so stupid and unlikely, it
was like crapping out ten times in a row: the damned
hook bounced up and hooked onto the train itself!
The little voice in the back of my head I hadn't
heard from recently chose this moment to speak to
me in the voice of an old kids' science show: So,
Flynn, what have we learned from today's experiment?
Well, Mr. Wizard, we've learned that if the train is
moving at the same speed as the spider-bastard, abso-
lutely nothing will happen!
     I humped back hand over hand, ducking down to
check under the train, looking for the hook. Saw it! I
slid through the train's shock absorbers. Time for
more help from the nuns. If we hit a bump, the shocks
would slice me in half. Suddenly, the train itself
seemed like one of the monsters.
     I made it through, then slid along the undercarriage
on my back across the covered axles, under the train,
until I could reach the flippin' hook. The damned
thing was caught on an Abel.
     I reached for the sucker and succeeded in touching
it. Yep, there it was. Touching it was a cinch. I could
touch it all I wanted without falling onto the track and
being ground to hobo stew.
     Getting it loose was the problem.
Once upon a time, I won a trophy in junior high
gymnastics; there were only five of us, but I was the
best in that class. I thought I was pretty hot stuff that
day. Looked to be the moment for an encore perfor-
mance.
     I went looser with the legs, increasing the possibility
of falling but giving me a longer reach. I didn't want
to perform this trick more than once.
     Not only did this stunt run the risk of my becoming
part of the track, there was the extra worry of losing
the duck gun dangling precariously from my back.
Not having my weapon could be as close to a death
sentence as getting run over by the Little Train that
Could.
     I got my hand around the hook, heaved, and yanked
it free. I did a war whoop worthy of a Comanche . . .
then I shut my eyes--I hate the sight of my own
bloody, mangled corpse--and dropped the thing to
the ground.
     This time the law of averages was enforced by the
probability police. The hook caught on a spar and
held. I gripped my perch and braced for impact.
I clenched my whole body as the webbing
     tightened--then the freaking stuff broke. It wasn't
supposed to do that! The end whipped like an enraged
snake, lashing across my back. But I didn't let go.
I waited for the sound of that massive body being
yanked to its doom. Still there was plenty of nothing.
This was becoming irritating. But there was some-
thing: despite the howling of the wind and the ma-
chine pounding of steel wheels on steel rails, I heard a
high, piping squeal. It sounded like a scream from
hell.
     As I began clambering back through the shocks and
up the side of the train, I heard explosions. Something
was happening. I climbed faster ... to be greeted by
the scene of the steam-demon shooting its missiles at
the spidermind. The latter was at a disadvantage,
listing as it moved, badly off balance.
     The webbing had torn one leg off the monstrosity. It
didn't take a rocket scientist to figure out what
happened next. Losing a leg would put the
     spidermind in a bad mood. It wouldn't be philosophi-
cal about it. No, it would fire a burst from its guns at
the only target in sight: the steam-demon.
     For all their power, these guys had a weakness as
deep as the ocean. Conquerors and masters need
some self-control.
     My primary goal now was to find Jill and get her
out of here; but I didn't see her from this angle. She
was probably still hugging the other side of the flatcar
where she had lassoed the spidermind's leg.
     The train hit a bad bump, exactly the impact that
would have left me beside myself when 1 was doing
my Tarzan of the shocks routine. The two monsters
took the bump personally and increased the ferocity
of the battle. I realized the high piping sound was
from the spider--it probably made the noise when it
lost its leg. The steam-demon emitted more human-
sounding screams.
     The wind seemed to be picking up, but neither
contestant paid any attention to the weather. As I
watched the spidermind tear up the steam-demon
with a nonstop barrage from the Gatling gun, I
remembered how difficult Arlene and I had found
taking one of these down before. The demon was
nothing compared to the other.
     But if there were a cosmic bookie keeping tabs on
this one, the final decision was still in doubt. The
steam-demon followed the optimum strategy for his
position, firing missile after missile at the robot
exterior to the spidermind's brain. Cracks were begin-
ning to appear.
     I stayed put, praying for the best possible outcome.
By the time the spidermind's brain case finally ex-
ploded, the steam-demon was so ripped it could
barely stand. Under the circumstances, things were
working out better than the original plan. After all, if
the spidermind had been eliminated as intended, we
would still have had to contend with the problem of
the steam-demon.
     While I was congratulating myself on the turn of
events, the train took a sudden turn and the tottering,
cybernetic creature nearly fell off the flatcar. That
would have been the perfect climax to the duel of the
titans.
     Dawn started to streak the horizon with a sickening
shade of green. The improved light made it much
easier to pick out details of the local terrain; such as
the high rock gorge we were just then passing over,
thanks to a narrow bridge. This would be a splendid
place for the steam-demon to take its final rest. The
perfect end, as I'd already thought, to the perfect
battle. Then I could find Jill and congratulate her on a
mission well done.
     The only flaw in this scenario consisted of a single
claw--the claw the steam-demon used to grab hold
and save itself as it fell right next to me. Right next to
me!
     It was bad enough seeing the demon this close up.
Far worse . . . it saw me. As weak and near death as
the thing was, it recognized a living human a few
inches away. Very slowly, it raised its missile hand.
It was slow; I was a whole lot faster. I back-drew my
double-barreled shotgun and fired both barrels, one-
handed, squeezing both triggers simultaneously.
Quite a kick. The blast tore off its entire hand at the
wrist... the gripping hand.
     The steam-demon plummeted off the car to the
ground, exploding noisily as it got off one last missile
shot that went straight up through the track ahead of
the train, in between the rails, right on a curve in the
bridge.
     The train didn't bother slowing as it rolled over the
missile-damaged point. I could imagine a cartoon
demon with an engineer's cap, throwing back a shot
of the good old hooch and not worrying about the
condition of the track ahead.
     As we passed, I saw in greenish daylight growing
brighter by the minute that part of the inside rail was
bent up from the blast. If it had been the outside rail
instead, we would have plunged into the gorge. The
President of the Twelve would've needed to audition a
new act.
     "Jill!" I howled. "Jill!" Climbing up to the flatcar
was easy, but I suddenly had a cramp deep in my
back. It was so bad that it paralyzed me for a moment.
I wouldn't let something like that stop me now. I
twisting around trying to loosen up, still calling, "Jill,
Jill!"
     Where the hell was that kid? I was starting to
worry.
     I reached the end of the flatcar, looked down . . .
and saw her there, gazing up at me with wide eyes.
"You all right?"
     She nodded, but not a word came out. Maybe she
was suffering from shock. I reached down and she
took my hand. I didn't care about the twinge in my
back now. I hauled her up.
     "Great!" I said.
"Alive?"
     "Of course!"
"Oh." She still seemed not entirely sure.
     I grabbed and hoisted her. Now my back felt fine,
and for a crazy moment the sick-o green dawn looked
beautiful.
     I put her down. The mummy and we were alone on
the flatcar now.
     A warm glow spread through me, not unlike the
warm jet of a hot tub. My old voice spoke, something
good for once: The debt is nearly paid.
     What debt? Oh. The debt of my stupidity in bring-
ing assault onto the enclave.
     That debt.
"Wait here." I could have sent her up the ladder to
signal the others to join us, but she had earned a rest
as far as I was concerned. Her vacation from hell
might not last longer than a few minutes, but I wanted
her to enjoy every second before I ordered her to face
death yet again. I got them myself, bringing them to
the cacophonous flatcar.
     Arlene and Albert looked as exhausted as Jill, and
as tired as I felt. Next time, we'd fly.
     Arlene bent over and began unwrapping, revealing
the face of another human in a world where being
human was something special.
     Huddling against the forty or fifty kilometer per
hour wind that leaked around the engines and air dam
ahead of us, remnants of the 300 kph hurricane two
meters either left or right, we crouched over our
mummy, staring. We saw the features of a black man,
mid-thirties. As we shifted him around on the plat-
form, I estimated his weight at about sixty-four kilos.
Not a bad weight for 1.7 meters.
     "What done him?" Jill shouted. A good question,
though I could barely hear her small voice over the
roar of train and wind. Computer and electronic jacks
were all over his flesh, stuck like pins into a doll. He
was unconscious. There were so many jacks, he'd
probably be in extreme pain if awake.
     Arlene pulled the lid back from his right eye,
revealing a cloudy white orb, so completely glazed
over that you couldn't make out a pupil. Even after
encountering a who's who of monsters, fiends, and
other denizens of hell, something really bothered me
about seeing this helpless man before me.
     He didn't reek like sour lemons, thank God. He was
no zombie.
     I still hadn't discussed with Jill or Albert what
Arlene and I had mulled over--namely, the possibili-
ty that the Bad Guys were trying for more perfect
human duplicates. Practice makes perfect. We had no
idea how the zombies were created. Sometimes I
thought they really were the reanimated dead; but
other times I could buy the idea they were trans-
formed while still alive. However the enemy was
doing it, the lemon stink was a by-product of dealing
with real human bodies.
     If the enemy ever made perfect human copies from
scratch, there would be no lemon smell, or anything
else to give them away.
     Arlene tried various methods of waking up the
man, even slapping him in the face, but nothing
worked. She looked at me and shrugged.
     Jill reached out and gingerly touched one of the
jacks sticking out from the man's flesh. She managed
to look crafty and thoughtful, even with her red hair
whipping around her face like a brushfire.
     She fingered the jack again and scowled.
Then Jill looked at me and mimed typing on a
keyboard. She raised her brows. What. . . ? I blinked;
light finally dawned on marblehead. She wanted to
hack this guy's brain?
     Well why the hell not?
We all crowded around the mummy, making a
     windbreak for Jill. Leaning so close, I could actually
make out a few words. "Need--jack--find out
     what--wants to fight--can't promise it'll--might be
the break . . ."
     I couldn't hear everything, but I got the gist.
The real question was what on earth was inside that
brain that was worth the protection of a spidermind
and a handful of steam-demons? Back on Phobos and
Deimos, the alien technology we had seen was differ-
ent, biological somehow. They used cyborgs, combi-
nation biological-mechanical, like the spidermind it-
self. Was that what this dude was, some sort of link
between humans and alien technology?
     Or the other way around?
Well, whatever. We weren't going to find out any-
thing in a wind tunnel. . . somehow, some way, we
simply had to get this guy off the damned train.
Somehow I doubted we could just ring the bell and
say "Next stop, conductor."
     I hoped the cybermummy would be enough of a son
of a bitch to join us when we unwrapped him.
"Vacation over!" I bellowed over the gale. "War
on!" Arlene gave me a dirty look, so I knew that the
awesome responsibility of command still rested on
my shoulders.
     The   man   seemed   physically   manhandled   and
bruised, but not seriously damaged, except for their
attempt to transform him into an appliance. The
question was, how would we get him off the train?
If we waited until we rolled into the station in L.A.,
I could imagine a slight difficulty in persuading a large
contingent of, say, steam-demons into helping us with
our cargo. The absence of the spidermind from the
flatcar would take a bit of explaining as well. We
lacked the firepower to make our argument com-
pletely convincing.
     "Suggestion," rumbled Albert. It was hard to pick
out his words; the timbre of his voice was too close to
the throb of the engines, and he wasn't a good
shouter. No practice, probably. I only caught some of
what he said and wasn't too sure about what I did
catch.
     "Father--trains! Trick or treat--Jill's age--
incorrect car--aggravates--emerging break . . . !"
I stared, trying to parse the incomprehensible
"plan." Trick or treat? Jill's age aggravates the emerg-
ing break?
     Or was that brake--emergency brake! Something
about an emergency brake.
     He tried again: "Couple of cars!" he hollered.
"Couple--car!"
     Couple of car. Cars? No, car ... couple-car.
I smacked my forehead. Decouple the car. Which
must activate, not aggravate, the emergency brake.
Jesus and Mary! What a nightmare; a loud one!
That seemed like a plenty good plan to Yours Truly.
Hauling the mummy up to the semiprotected roof,
we staggered overhead toward the last car; that's the
one we would decouple. The train was going as fast as
before, but we humped a lot faster along the roof this
time. Killing the spidermind and steam-demon
worked wonders for our self-confidence. Jill's attitude
was so changed that I could probably dangle her over
the edge, holding onto her ankles, without her show-
ing a quiver, though I was glad we didn't require such
a demonstration.
     There were three cattle cars, which we had to pass
by creeping along the sides, centimeters away from
staring zombies. I thought sure they'd start shooting
at us--what a time to die! At least the demons
wouldn't keep their mummy.
     But the reworked humans merely stared with malig-
nant stupidity. They'd been given no orders, you see
. . .just like bureaucrats at the Pentagod.
     When we reached the last car, an enclosed cargo
car, I looked down through the slatted roof to see that
the interior was stuffed with zombies. As expected.
Albert slid down between the cars in search of the
emergency decoupler. After checking it, he climbed
back up and shouted, "When?"
     Another good question. We didn't want to be stuck
in the middle of the desert. If we hung until the
suburbs of L.A., we should be able to hold our own
combatwise and be close enough to supplies, shelter,
and other transportation.
     I tried to remember the L.A. geography. "River-
side!" I shouted. That is, assuming the train passed
through Riverside. If not, any eastern bedroom com-
munity would do.
     Seeing was considerably easier in the daylight, even
in the pale green light. For the moment, I didn't even
mind the greenish hue of an alien sky. Get rid of these
damned invaders, and we could look up at the natural
color of blue minus the gray haze for which L.A. was
famous. It would take a lot of work increasing the
population to get everything back to normal, but it
would be a satisfying challenge.
     "Single!" hollered Albert. Why was he telling me
that? "Single in couple!" Whoops--signal when he
should decouple the car. He climbed back down.
Arlene tossed me a faint nod and half smile, then
gingerly slithered down the ladder and joined him.
25
     Fly was too good a friend for me not to be
honest with him. But I was so surprised how fast
things were going that there wasn't anything for me to
say. Who could talk in this breeze, anyway?
     Fly, like most guys, made certain assumptions
about women. When we decided just to be friends, I
expected a certain strain. But we were pals, buddies,
comrades. I liked it that way.
     But bring another man into the picture, and there
are consequences. Fly was a big brother. He never did
take to Willie; and I don't think he ever thought
there'd be the slightest chance I'd ever fall for a
religious dude--especially a Mormon!
     "Fall" was a bad image. I squeezed down between
the surging cars, watching the river of brown streaks
racing below us as the ground sped past. Albert stood
on the metal tongue-thing that held the cars together;
he kept switching his grip back and forth as the cars
shimmied. I never realized they moved that much.
I was falling for Albert. Crazy, buggin', retarded.
Nothing short of the end of the world could have
brought this about.
     One "end-of-the-world," order up! Maybe we could
reverse what had happened and give the human race a
reason to go on living. Survivors. Those who refused
to go down until the fat monster sang.
     On Phobos, I thought I might be the only human
being left alive in the universe. Then on Deimos, I
thought Fly and I might be the only two human
beings.
     However few there were on Earth to stand against
the invader, all that mattered was that Fly and I were
no longer alone. And looking down on the wide
shoulders of my new friend, I hoped I'd be "un-alone"
in other ways too.
     Drawing near, I saw his lips moving, reciting words
that could have been from the Bible for all I knew.
Some kind of prayer, I reckoned; it seemed to calm
him, give him courage. Guess there's some good in
religion after all, if you knew where to look.
I wondered if he had the entire Book of Mormon
memorized, or just the "good parts," the passages
that suited his prejudice? I knew, somehow, that
Albert wasn't like that--maybe the first guy I ever
met who guided his lifestyle by his faith, instead of
the other way around.
     He stopped, looked up at me and smiled. With an
opening like that, he could hardly blame me for taking
the next step farther down the ladder.
     "Albert!" I shrieked. He said something, but I
couldn't hear him. I was probably embarrassing him.
That was nothing new for me when it came to
     interpersonal relationships. "I find you really attract-
ive!" I bellowed romantically, secure in the knowl-
edge that he couldn't hear a damned word. Then I
shut up and listened to the train wheels.
     "Something mumble something," he said. Damn,
he was embarrassed. But he pressed on, as brave with
me as he'd been with the monsters. Now why did I
make such a comparison? Typical, Arlene, I said to
myself; always your own worst critic.
     I don't mean to make you uncomfortable, I silently
mouthed into the maelstrom.
     He shook his head and shrugged, which might have
meant, I don't have the faintest idea what you're
saying . . . but I preferred to interpret it as Nonsense,
darling; my religion is really important to me, but so
are you--and I know how you feel about it,
     He had me there. I didn't want to say anything right
then. Physical combat can be so much easier than the
other kind! I listened to the steady rhythm of the train
wheels pounding in my skull like a .50 caliber ma-
chine gun, drowning out even the 300 kph typhoon we
rolled through. The irregular rattling sound of the
coupler, waiting for Albert's hands to reach down and
seize it, sounded like ground-to-air artillery.
I looked at the ground unfurling beneath us like a
giant banner; then I looked up at blurs that might be
trees or telephone poles, shading a dawn green as a
lime before it rotted and became zombie lotion.
"I can't give you what you want," I said at normal
speaking volume. Even I couldn't hear me.
     He said nothing, but looked up shyly at me.
I liked him calling me beautiful. With his eyes, at
least. I liked it a lot. Being honest came more easily
now that we were both admitting our mutual attrac-
tion. Well, you know what I mean--this wasn't
exactly the best spot for a romantic conversation; but
I knew what he would be admitting if I could hear
him.
     It wasn't only that I had problems with his religion;
I didn't like any of them. I don't like turning over
moral authority to a bearded ghost that you can't find
when everything blows up.
     Besides, we might not be compatible in other ways.
Hah, how pure Arlene that was! Telling the man I
wanted all the reasons why it would never work. I was
grateful that it was so noisy down here that Fly
couldn't hear a word. Time to shift from negatives to
positives.
     "But Albert, we could give it a try," I said, not
caring that I was basically talking to the wind and the
wheels. He wasn't even looking at me at the moment,
concentrating on keeping his balance and not losing a
finger in the metal clacking thing.
     "We could, like, date. You know, spend a few nights
together, if we live through this. Who knows? Some-
thing might happen."
     Again he left me to contemplation of the train and
the terrain. He was obviously struggling over what I'd
said. It was pretty obvious that four forces were
fighting in him at this moment: morality, manners,
moi, and volume-comma-lack of.
     Finally he worked up his nerve, craned his neck
again where he could look me in the eye and said,
"Something rumble something question mark?"
     Now that was a conversation stopper. But I only let
it stop us for a moment. "You mean, you're a virgin?"
I asked, incredulous.
     He tilted his head to the side; was that a yes?
"But you're a Marine!" I howled in amazement.
I burst out laughing at my own outburst. The
Church of the Marine loomed larger in my mind than
any competing firm.
     Of course, there are Marines who remain loyal to
their wives or abstain from sex for religious reasons.
Hey, fornication is not part of the job description!
Amazing, but true. Still, the odds were against the
clean-living Marine. "You ever heard the phrase,
'There are no virgins in foxholes'?" I asked.
He watched my animated, one-sided dialogue--it
wasn't really a monologue--in puzzlement, tortured
soul that he was. I couldn't give up that easily. What
about the various ports and landing zones he must
have visited on his sea tour? Bombay, Madrid, Ma-
nila, Hong Kong, Calcutta, Kuwait City!
     Albert smiled at me again. Progress! I had an
admission. I knew how I would conduct the cross-
examination: "So tell me, Mr. Marine Corps sniper,
did you never visit any of the local sex scenes? The
cages of Bombay that hang over the street, where you
have sex with a pross in full view? The port-pros in
Manila? The Hong Kong sex tours, where a soldier
with a few bucks in his pocket can visit a dozen
knocking shops in a day and a half? Kefiri City, with
more glory holes than any other . . . ?
     You don't know? Uh, you place your you-know-
what through a hole in a wall and somebody on the
other side does, you know.
     Yeah, maybe it was morals. Maybe he just didn't
want his gun to turn green and fall off.
     The angle was probably tough on his neck, but he
swiveled his body a little so he could almost face me.
"Something jumble something interrogative?"
     Me? Well no, not exactly. He stared at me awhile
longer. No, those places tend to be attractions for a
male Marine. What would I do with a glory hole, for
Pete's sake?
     Heh, I could work the other side, theoretically. All
right; he might have been naive in some ways, but he
was a man of the world in others. The contradictions
in this big man appealed to me. He contained multi-
tudes.
     I reached out and touched his cheek, glad he didn't
pull away. I was afraid he might have been ready to
write me off as a Marine slut. No dice; I was a
responsible girl. . . responsible behavior in today's
world meant carry extra loads and sleep with both
eyes open. To quote everybody's third-favorite weird
German philosopher, Oswald Spengler:
     Life, if it would be great, is hard; it demands a
choice only between victory and ruin, not be-
tween war and peace. And to the victors belong
the sacrifices of victory. For that which shuffles
querulously and jealously by the side of the
events is only literature.
     Hey, that could be our first date! We hurl quota-
tions at each other from thirty paces!
     26
Riverside was coming up fast, so I took
     another look down at Arlene and Albert. They
seemed to be carrying on a deeply meaningful conver-
sation, though the Blessed Virgin only knew how they
could possibly hear each other over that racket. It
seemed impolite to stare, so I focused my attention on
the horizon. There was a war to fight, a war to fight.
"Albert! Now!" I boomed at peak volume as the
town raced up to greet us. Albert and Arlene started
yanking on a lever atop the coupler. They heaved
again and again, until I thought we'd be cruising into
Grand Central before they got the bloody thing un-
hooked. Then it cracked open and the cars separated
with an explosive bang.
     The pneumatic brakes activated automatically,
slowing the loose car we were on while the rest of the
train sped on, oblivious, impervious. I wondered if
the aliens would even notice that a car was missing.
We destroyed the spidermind; did they have enough
initiative even to count?
     We braked toward a stop, more or less terrifyingly.
The rails screamed, the car rocked and rolled. Jill held
on for dear life, looking as green as the sky. Arlene
and Albert kicked back, cool to the max. I was too
busy watching everybody else to notice whether I was
cool or freaked: I didn't want one of my crew to fall
under the wheels and be crushed to death without me
being instantly aware of it.
     I couldn't bring myself to abandon the car without
expressing an opinion on the zombies sardine-canned
below. I positioned myself and fired a bunch of
rounds through the roof slats. This riled them up, and
they behaved in the approved manner. They attacked
each other with mindless ferocity.
     As the car came to a complete stop, Albert and I
managed the cybermummy between us quite easily.
We hopped down and bolted for cover in an alley.
The streets of Riverside were like the valleys of a
lost civilization or the canyons of a mysterious planet.
We beat cleats up and down to throw off any alien
patrols.
     Although deep in the heart of enemy territory,
surrounded by more monsters than at any other time
since returning to Earth, it was a relief to be off the
train. I didn't know about the others, but I was
for solid ground underfoot again.
     There was no way to tell what were the mummy's
requirements for life support. Perhaps with an IV he
could survive indefinitely in his present condition;
but there was no way for us to be certain without
direct communication.
     Meanwhile, Arlene and Jill took point and tail,
respectively. We were at the part of the mission where
we were truly interchangeable, except for the necessi-
ty of keeping Jill alive until she could do her computer
trick. Nowhere was safer than anywhere else.
We whisked through street and alley, avoiding
patrols of roving monsters. We ran, carrying the
mummy like old bedclothes between us. Putting the
mummy down for a moment, Albert pointedly asked
of Jill, "Are there any safe houses around here?"
Digging into her pack, Jill produced that small,
portable computer, the CompMac ultramicro, more
compact than any I'd seen before.
     "Where'd you get that?" asked Arlene.
Jill answered with a lot of pride: "Underground
special--built by the Church. You can get inventions
out fast when you don't have to worry about FCC regs
and product liability lawsuits."
     She called up her safe-house program and then told
all of us to look away. I doubted that I'd turn to stone
if I didn't comply. Anyway, I complied . . . and lis-
tened to her type in about thirty characters--her key
code, obviously. When she was finished, I looked at
her again as she scrutinized her screen.
     She nodded and pressed her lips firmly together, a
sure sign in my book of Mission Accomplished.
"There's a safe house about a mile from here on
Paglia Place," she said. Then she called up a map of
Riverside and showed the rest of the route the pro-
gram suggested.
     "I see a problem with part of this," said Arlene.
"The route goes within a couple of blocks of an old
IRS field office where I used to deliver papers while I
was a courier."
     "Courier? What for?" asked Jill.
"For two years of college."
     "Whadja get?"
"Minimum wage. Fifteen per hour, OldBucks."
     "No, I mean what degree!"
"Oh. A.A. in engineering and computer program-
ming," answered Arlene, embarrassed. I could imag-
ine why. Arlene's degree must seem awfully trivial
compared to what Jill had picked up on her own.
Jill nodded. "Hip," she said, without dissing my
pal, for which I was grateful. The gal was a pretty
grown-up fourteen-year-old, astute enough to recog-
nize that Arlene was very touchy about only going to a
two-year college. She couldn't afford any longer.
We followed the revised route Arlene traced.
I had some advice that nobody wanted to hear:
"Fly's prime directive is not to use firearms unless ab-
so-lute-ly necessary!"
     Jill was the first critic. "But Fly, it's not like they're
human."
     "Using martial arts might only entertain them,"
Arlene added. "I'm not even sure a shiv would bother
them, assuming you can find their ribs to stick it
between."
     "Is everyone finished?" I asked, a bit impatiently.
"I'm not getting all liberal; I mean the wrong noise at
the wrong moment could bring down a horde on our
heads."
     "Oh, why didn't you say so?"
I wished there were a quick course I could take in
monster aikido; failing that, I'd settle for learning
where they kept their glass jaws, so a quick uppercut
could do the trick.
     We padded up dark alleys and narrow streets,
trying to stay out of the sun. After a couple of klicks,
Arlene suddenly stopped cold. When the Marine
taking point does that, it's time for everyone to play
Living Statue. We froze and waited.
     Jill, for all her fighting instincts, didn't have the
training. She started to ask what was wrong, but I
clamped a hand over her mouth. Arlene continued
facing forward but gestured behind her for the rest of
us to backtrack. We did it very slowly; whatever it was
hadn't noticed us yet, and I aimed to keep it that way.
We backed up about a hundred meters before she let
out her breath.
     "Remember the fatty we saw back at the train
depot?" she asked. "We just bumped into its older,
wider brother."
     We'd been so busy that I never got around to getting
her to name that mobile tub of lard; but I instantly
knew the creature she meant. I'd hoped that maybe
the thing was an exception to the rule, an accident
rather than a standard design. I preferred fighting
monsters that didn't make me sick.
     "I thought it was a huge pile of garbage," Arlene
whispered intently.
     Blinking into the darkness ahead, I finally made out
a huge shadow shifting among the other shadows. The
thing roused itself with the sound of tons and tons of
wet burlap dragged across concrete. It stood to a
height of two meters, only my height actually, but
weighing at least four hundred kilos. The density and
width of the thing was incredible.
     The fatty--if we lived through this one, I hoped I
could talk Arlene into a better name--made slush-
slush sounds as it moved. It was probably leaving
something disgusting behind it, like a snail track. In
the massive, shapeless, metal paws that encased or
replaced its hands, the fatty held some kind of weird,
three-headed gun.
     The thing wasn't facing us. It stood sideways, trying
to figure out from which direction had come the noise
disturbing its repose. Then it turned away from us,
giving us an unobstructed view of its mottled, dis-
gusting back. It made a horrible, rasping noise that I
guessed was the sound of its breathing.
     I pointed in the other direction . . . but just then we
heard stomping feet approaching up the block that
way. A troop of monsters. Just what we needed!
They were led by a bony. If we didn't know how
dangerous it could be, it would seem sort of funny,
leading them with that jerking-puppet gait.
     There was nothing amusing about being trapped
between a fatty in front and the Ghoul Club behind,
between hammer and anvil, with no side streets or
doors to duck into.
     Albert sighed. I watched his shoulders untense. He
unslung his weapon with casual ease, as though he had
all the time in the world; which in a way he did. He
was ready to die for the "cause," whether that was us
or the rest of whatever.
     Me, I was ready to live for mine.
Jill's face went utterly white, but she didn't give any
indication of bugging. After the flatcar, she was a
seasoned vet. Like the rest of us, she had that special
feeling of living on borrowed time. She clutched the
ultramicro to her chest, more upset about failing than
dying. She contemplated our mummy with regret;
she'd never get the hack of a lifetime!
     Arlene whispered "Cross fire" a nanosecond before
it occurred to me. Darting into the middle of the
street, we had the bony in our sights. It stopped and
immediately bent at the waist and fired its shoulder
rockets. I hit the deck and Arlene dodged left. The
rockets sailed over my head, one of them bursting
against the big, brown back of the fatty.
     Enraged, the fatty located the source of this scurril-
ous, unprovoked attack. It raised both arms and fired
three gigantic, flaming balls of white phosphorous at
the bony.
     The center ball hit, but the other two spread,
striking other members of the bony's entourage, fry-
ing them instantly.
     The surviving members were no happier than the
fatty had been earlier; they opened fire, and the bony
forgot all about us, firing two more rockets at fat boy.
Meanwhile, my crew were very, very busy lying on
their bellies and kissing dirt for all they were worth,
hands over heads. All except me: I kept my hands free
and rolled onto my back, shotgun pointing back and
forth, back and forth, like a fan at a tennis match.
I didn't want to call attention to our little party, but
neither did I want us to be noticed by a smarter-than-
average monster who wanted to spill our guts to
celebrate its position on the food chain. I wished it
were still night.
     The bony ran out of rockets before the fatty ran out
of fireballs. The bone bag blew apart into tiny pieces,
white shards so small they could be mistaken for
hailstones, were this not Los Angeles.
     The fatty kept firing. There were plenty of troops
left to take out, and the walking flab seemed to have
an inexhaustible supply of pyrotechnics. Maybe he
got his stuff from the same shop used by the steam-
demon.
     At last, any troops left intact were no longer mov-
ing. The fatty kept firing for a while into their inert
bodies.
     When it stopped, nothing moved anywhere in
sight--assuming those little pig eyes could see very
far. We lay as still as we could; I wished we could stop
the sounds of our breathing. A lump of congestion
had settled somewhere in my head, and I wheezed on
every second breath, but I was afraid to hold my
breath for fear I would start coughing.
     Of course, the monster's hearing might not be any
great shakes. I could see small black holes on either
side of his lard-encrusted head. If those were ears,
they seemed minuscule. I lay still, rationalizing and
wheezing, hoping the thing would do anything
except--except exactly what it did next.
     The fatty was badly shot and cut up, like a giant,
spherical hamburger patty that had fallen apart on the
grill. It rumbled and began to shuffle directly for us. If
the monstrous thing stepped on one of us as it passed,
it would be a messy death.
     27
I decided if one of those massive feet were
     about to descend on any one of us, I would open fire.
There might be a military argument for letting one of
us die if the others were passed over, anyone but Jill,
but--forget it. Not like that!
     As fat boy stumped slowly in our direction, I
realized with a sinking feeling that it was another
genetic experiment copying the human form. The
whole design was clearly functional, another killer-
critter. But if they could make creatures this close to
our basic body type, then they could do copies of us in
time.
     As these thoughts raced through my mind, the thing
took one ponderous step after another, coming closer
and closer--allowing for inspection of its nonhuman
qualities. The skin was like that of a rhinoceros. Feed
this lumpkin an all-you-can-eat buffet (with a dis-
count coupon), and it might top out at half a ton. The
bald head looked like a squashed football; the beady
eyes took no note of us as it came within spitting
distance. It had to be nearsighted. Now, if it were deaf
and unable to smell, it might just miss us.
     Good news and bad: if fat boy continued walking a
straight line, it would miss us all. Alas, Jill's
ultramicro lay directly next to her, and the fatty was
about to step on this critical piece of equipment.
There wasn't time for anyone to do anything,
except for Jill. All she had to do was reach out with
her right hand and grab it. I saw her raise her head
and start to move her hand, but she froze. What if it
saw her!
     With only a second to spare, she worked up her
nerve and yanked the computer out of the way before
the monster would have crushed it flat. By waiting so
long, she solved her problem--the fatty couldn't see
its own feet. The bulk of the vast stomach obscured
Jill's quick movement.
     Fat boy slogged on without further mishap.
I was ready to heave a sigh of relief, clear my throat,
maybe even enjoy a cough or two. Jill started to get
up. Arlene and Albert weren't moving yet, waiting for
the all-clear from Yours Truly. I almost gave it when a
blast of machine-gun fire erupted behind the fatty.
I was too damned tired to curse. We could use a
short rest before taking on new playmates!
     The fatty wasn't happy about the turn of events
either. It screamed with a sound more piglike than the
pinkie demons.
     The bullets sprayed in a steady stream, so many
that some were surely penetrating that thick hide to
disrupt vital organs--however deeply those organs
were hidden underneath a stinking expanse of quiver-
ing flesh.
     As the machine gun cut the monster to ribbons, I
heard bug-wild, crazy laughter, the kind made only by
a human being. The laughter continued, the bullets
continued, until at last the fatty made the transition
from hamburger to road kill. It made a wet, flopping
sound, collapsed into itself and died.
     We weren't playing statues while this was going on.
Guns at the ready, firing positions, we faced . . . what
looked like another human being. A very large human
figure.
     I almost called out, but I checked myself. Despite
my gut-level joy at seeing another human, my innate
suspicion held me back. After all, some real, live
humans cooperated with the alien invasion. Sure, this
guy shot the fatty; maybe he was on our side. But we
couldn't be sure of that; and if he didn't come into the
alley, he wouldn't see us. The alley was in deep
shadow, hidden from even the pallid green light of a
reworked sky.
     Unfortunately, Jill was not a Marine. She was a
young girl, and like most teenagers, she sometimes
acted on auto pilot.
     "You're human!" she yelped. Then she stopped
suddenly, hand over her mouth, as if trying to push
the words back inside. She realized what she had
done. As to the consequences, she'd learn those in the
next moment. So would the rest of us in the black
alley.
     The figure lifted a hand to its head and flipped back
a visor over its helmet. The face underneath seemed
human enough, from what I could see. He wasn't
smiling. Jill made as if she might run, but she was
thinking again. She wouldn't lead him back to us.
"It's all right, little girl," he said, scanning, trying to
locate her. "I won't hurt you." He took a tentative
step in her direction, and she held her ground, not
making another sound.
     Silhouetted against the light gray wall of a
carniceria, he was an impressive sight. But whose side
was he on? This deep into enemy territory, we
couldn't let anything compromise us, not even com-
mon sense or basic instincts.
     Fighting monsters was so black-and-white that
there was something clean about it. This man was not
a monster. Were we about to have the firefight of our
lives, a new ally, or a Mexican standoff?
     He didn't have a flash; probably figured he wouldn't
need one in the daylight, such as it was. In the dark
alley, however ...
     Silently, slowly, I slid my pair of day-night goggles
out of my webbing and slipped them on, flicking the
switch as I did so.
     Now I could make out more of his gear: .30 cal
machine gun, a belt-fed job; backpack full of ammo;
radio gear; a flak jacket that screamed state-of-the-art
body armor; and a U.S. Army Ranger uniform, staff
sergeant. "Come on out, little girl; let me see you. It's
all right." He raised his hand as if scratching his chin
stubble . . . but a crackling sound followed by a rum-
bling voice made it clear that he was talking into a
handheld mike.
     I also saw one more twist: he had a pair of dis-
tended goggles himself on his helmet--night-vis gog-
gles, they had to be.
     When Jill said nothing, he reached up for them. My
heart pounded; as soon as he put them on, he would
see all of us crouched in the shadows.
     As if she sensed the danger--or maybe she knew
she'd blown it and was trying to redeem herself--Jill
stepped forward into the faint illumination reflected
from the dragon-green sky by the pale wall of the
Mexican meat market. "H-Here I am, sir," she called.
"Are you alone?" he asked.
     Jill was a trooper. "Yes sir. I'm alone, sir."
Slowly, the man lowered his machine gun right at
her small, narrow tummy. The universe became a still
picture of the man, the gun, Jill. . . and my hand
tightened on the trigger of my avenger.
     "Take it nice and easy," he told Jill. "You're comin'
to meet the boss."
     "Who's that?" she asked, her voice firm.
"We'll get along a lot better," he said, "if you get it
through your head right now, bitch, that you don't ask
the questions."
     "What if I don't want to go?" she asked.
"Then I'll drop you where you stand," he answered.
The machine gun had not shifted an inch. "Now
move it or lose it," he said.
     Jill moved all right, slowly and deliberately so he
wouldn't suspect anything. The gun followed her, and
the sergeant turned his back to the alley; and I guess
that's what she intended all along, for she took a dive
as soon as his body blocked the line of fire.
I needed no second chance. Mister Mystery Ranger
didn't have the proper attitude toward "little girls."
Not by a long shot.
     Unloading both barrels into the guy's back got his
attention. Arlene opened fire with her AB-10. Be-
tween the two of us, we gave him a quick and effective
lesson in good manners.
     He staggered, but managed to turn around. That
armor of his was something! He started firing wildly
while Arlene and Albert pumped more lead.
     I slammed two more shells home into my trusty
duck-gun and let them go into the son of a bitch's
head.
     The fancy headgear cracked like a colorful Easter
egg and spilled out its contents. Surprise, you're dead!
None of us moved for at least a minute, listening
for the sound of more aliens attracted by the noise.
There were no footsteps or nearby trucks, but we did
hear sporadic gunfire in the distance. Probably zom-
bies.
     "Jill," Arlene called out. Jill returned with an
expression that could only be described as sheepish.
The girl was covered in dust but didn't have a scratch
on her.
     "I'm sorry," Jill volunteered; "I feel like a total
dweeb." The apology didn't save her from Arlene.
"That was a stupid mistake! You could have iced us
all!"
     Defiantly, Jill turned to me, Daddy against
Mommy. I didn't say a word, didn't stop Arlene,
didn't change expression. Sorry, kid--I'm not going
to undermine my second just to save your ego. I didn't
think it was that dumb a mistake; she was just a kid.
But Arlene had chosen to make it an issue . . . and
whatever I thought, I'd back her to the hilt.
Jill started to blink, angrily holding back tears. She
turned to Albert, but he was suddenly really busy
wiping his gun barrel. Well--about time she learned:
no hero allowances, and I guess no kid allowances,
either.
     "All right," she said, voice quavering. "What do
you want me to do?"
     Arlene stepped close, lowering her voice so I could
barely hear it. "There's nothing you can do. You owe
me, Jill; and before the mission is over, you are going
to pay."
     When Arlene stepped back, Jill's eyes were wide.
The bravado and defiance were gone. She was scared
to death ... of Arlene Sanders.
     The shock treatment seemed to work. Jill focused
on something more important than her own short-
comings. "God, is the mummy all right?"
     While Albert and Jill went to check out our recruit
from the bandage brigade, I did an inventory on the
soldier with the lousy manners.
     Arlene joined me. "Was he a traitor?" she asked of
the inert form at our feet; "or did we just kill a good
guy?"
     "Or worse, A.S. Is this that perfect genetic ex-
periment we've been half-expecting ever since Dei-
mos?"
     "If he's Number Three," she said, "we'll have
to--to give him a name." She kicked the side
of the machine-guy with her boot. "I'll call him a
Clyde."
     "Clyde?" I asked, dumbfounded. "That's worse
than fatty! It's just a name."
     "Clyde, "she declared, with the really irritating tone
of voice she only uses when she makes up her mind
and can't believe anybody would still be arguing.
"But Clyde?" I repeated like a demented parrot.
"Why not Fred or Barney, or Ralph or Norton?" I
suspected that I might be spinning out of control.
"For Clyde Barrow," she explained . . . and I still
didn't get it. "You know," she continued with the
cultural-literacy tone of vice, "Bonnie Parker and
Clyde Barrow--Bonnie and Clyde!"
     "Oh," I said, finally ready to surrender. "Jesus H.,
that's really obscure!"
     At the precise moment that I invoked the name of
the Savior, good old Albert decided to rejoin us,
reinforcing a theory I've had for years that if you call
on the gods, you are rewarded with a plague of
believers. Not that I was thinking of Albert as part
of a plague just then. The plague was out there, be-
yond us, where it belonged--in the heart of Los
Angeles.
     28
I thought you had a Christian upbringing,"
     said Albert, annoyed at Yours Truly for the blas-
phemy.
     "Catholic school," Arlene answered.
"Oh, that explains it," said Albert, which / found a
bit annoying.
     Further discussion seemed a losing proposition. So
I resumed investigation of the Clyde. Which re-
minded of the earlier discussion about nomenclature.
"Hey, Jill," I called out. "We decided to name this
bastard a Clyde."
     "A Clyde?" asked Jill in the same tone of voice I
had said "Jesus H."
     "Yep."
"What a dumb name!" I decided to put her in my
will. Make fun of my religion, will they?
     I went back to my close study of the Clyde. As I'd
noticed before, he appeared fully human, if a bit
large. Frankly, I didn't think he could be a product of
genetic engineering; the results had been too crude up
to this point. Most likely, he'd been recruited by the
aliens.
     I was sorry the man was dead, because I'd like to
kill him again. It made me furious that any human
would cooperate with the subjugation of his own race.
I kicked the corpse.
     Arlene was a good mind reader. "You think he's a
traitor," she said.
     "What else could he be?"
"You already suggested it."
     "What's that?" asked Albert. Jill was all ears, too.
The time had finally come to lay all the cards on the
table.
     "We've been considering the possibility that the
aliens might be able to make perfect human dupli-
cates," I told them.
     "He could be one," said Arlene, pointing at the
man. "Maybe the first example of a successful geneti-
cally engineered human. First example we've seen,
anyway."
     "I don't buy it," I said.
"But what makes you think it's even possible?"
asked Albert, obviously disturbed by the suggestion.
Arlene took a deep breath. "On Deimos we saw
gigantic blocks of human flesh. I'm sure it was raw
material for genetic experiments. Later, Fly and I saw
vats where they were mass producing monsters."
"In a way," I interrupted, "even the boney and the
fatty are closer to being 'human' than the other
genetic experiments--hell-princes, steam-demons,
pumpkins."
     "And now they've succeeded," said Arlene, looking
down.
     "Hope you're wrong," I said. "It's too much of a
quantum leap, Arlene. Even the clothes are too good!"
"You have an argument there," she admitted.
     "Those stupid red trunks on the boneys were awful."
We looked at the spiffy uniform on the man.
     "He talked like a real person," Jill observed. I
hadn't thought about it before, but everything about
his manner of speaking rang true, even the threaten-
ing tone at the end. If he hadn't been such a total
bastard, I wouldn't have enjoyed killing him so much.
Making a monster was one thing; cobbling together a
first-class butthead was a lot harder, requiring tender
loving care.
     "OK," said Albert. "He looks, walks, talks and
smells like a human being. So maybe he was one."
"Whatever he was, he's good and dead; and that's
what matters right now," I tried to conclude the issue.
The way Arlene kept looking at the man meant that
she couldn't shake the disturbing idea that he was a
synthetic creation. I didn't doubt that they could do
stuff like this in time. My objective was to prevent
them having that time.
     Arlene shuddered, then shook her head hard, as if
dislodging any nasty little critters that might have
snuck in there. "Well, if they did make him, he's only
a staff sergeant. There's a lot of room for progress
before they hit second lieutenant and start downhill
again."
     Albert laughed hard at that. She gave him an
appreciative glance.
     In a way, it was kind of strange to nit-pick over
which was more likely to be true: human traitors or
human duplicates. Either possibility was disturbing.
I let my mind wander over the uncertain terrain
where treason sprouts like an ugly mushroom. If U.S.
armed forces were cooperating with the aliens, were
they under orders from the civilian government? Had
Washington caved in immediately to become a Vichy-
style administration? And what could the aliens offer
human collaborators that the humans would be stu-
pid enough to believe?
     I didn't doubt for one second that the enemy
intended the extermination of the human race as we
knew it. Zombie slaves and a few human specimens
kept around for experimental purposes didn't count
as species survival in my book.
     I must have been carrying worry on my face,
because Albert put his hand on my shoulder and said,
"We needn't concern ourselves over the biggest possi-
ble picture. One battle at a time is how we'll win this
war. First, we destroy the main citadel of alien power
in Los Angeles. Then we'll stop them in New York,
Houston, Mexico City, Paris, London, Rome--ah,
Tokyo. . . ." He trailed off. Already quite a list, wasn't
it?
     "Atlanta," said Jill.
"Orlando," said Arlene. "We must save the good
name of the mouse on both coasts!"
     "You know," I mused, "I wonder how much of the
invasion force Arlene and I destroyed on Deimos."
"Oh, at least half," boasted my buddy; but she
might not be far wrong. We killed a hell of a lot of
monsters on the Martian moons. Each new carcass
meant one less demonic foot soldier on terra firma.
"You know," said Jill, her voice sounding oddly
old, "I could kill every one of those human traitors."
"I'm with you, hon," I agreed; "but you've got to be
careful about blanket statements like that. Some were
threatened, tortured. Hell, some could have been
tricked. They didn't go through what we did on
Deimos! They might have been told that the mass
destruction was caused by human-against-human and
now these superior aliens have come to Earth with a
plan for ultimate peace."
     "I'll bet YOU were a pain in your High School debate
society, Fly Taggart," said long suffering Arlene. "But
you know damn well what she means!"
     "Put it down to my practical side, if you want," I
said. "I like to know the score before I pick a play."
Albert added a note. "Anyone can make a terrible
mistake and still repent before the final hour."
"It's possible," I said.
     "I'm sorry I made that crack about your growing up
Catholic."
     The two atheist females acted suitably disgusted by
our theological love-fest. "The girls don't believe in
redemption of traitors, Albert," I said.
     "I'll pray for anyone," he said; "even traitors."
"Fine," said Arlene. "Pray over their graves."
While we failed to resolve yet another serious
philosophical issue, Jill squatted over the corpse. In a
very short time she'd become hardened to the sight
and smell of carnage. Good. She had a chance to
survive in the new world.
     "Are you all right?" Arlene asked.
"Don't worry about me," Jill said, following my
example and kicking the corpse. "They're just bags of
blood, and we've got the pins. It's no big thing."
No one was joking now. Arlene looked at me with a
worried expression. This was no time to psycho-
analyze a fourteen-year-old who was doing her best to
feel nothing. This sort of cold attitude was par for the
course in an adult, a mood that would be turned off
(hopefully) in peacetime; but hearing it from a kid
was unnerving.
     The words just out of her lips were the cold truth we
created. Do only the youngest soldiers develop the
attitude necessary to win a war? Until this moment, I
wouldn't have thought of Arlene and myself as old-
fashioned sentimentalists; but if the future human
race became cold and machine-like to fight the mon-
sters, then maybe the monsters win, regardless of the
outcome.
     Recreation time was over. Jill went to the
cybermummy and started to lift him; he was really
too heavy for her to do alone, and we got the idea.
Albert helped her, and Arlene and I returned to battle
readiness. The next goal was obvious: find the
safehouse. We couldn't make good time sneaking
through the dark carrying a mummy.
     We were only ninety minutes away. All we ran into
along the way was a pair of zombies, almost a free
ride. I popped them both before Arlene even got off a
shot.
     "You have all the fun," said Albert. "This guy is
starting to weigh!"
     "You don't hear Jill complaining, do you?" asked
Arlene. Jill said nothing. But I could see the sweat
beading on her forehead and her breathing was more
rapid. Arlene noticed, too. "Jill, would you like to
switch with me?" she asked.
     "I'm all right," she said, determined to prove
something to someone.
     Jill managed to hold up her end all the way to the
door of the crappiest looking rattrap in a whole block
of low rent housing. She heaved a sigh of relief as she
finally put down her burden.
     This stretch of hovels didn't seem to have been
bombed by anything but bad economic decisions. The
house was one-story, shapeless as a cardboard box
with a sheet of metal thrown on top pretending to be a
roof. The yard was a narrow stretch of dirt with
garbage piled high. It looked worse than any apart-
ment I'd ever seen and gave the scuzziest motels a run
for the money, if anyone with a dime in his pocket
would be caught dead there.
     The final perfect touch was a monotonous cacopho-
ny of dumb-ass, psychometal "music" blaring
     through the thin walls.
"Let me take it from here," Albert volunteered.
"Be my guest," I said.
     He knocked on a flimsy door covered with streaks
of peeling, yellow paint; I half expected the whole
structure to crash down in a shambles. I figured we'd
wait a long time before any denizens within roused
themselves. Instead, the door opened within a few
seconds.
     It was like stepping back in time to the late twenti-
eth century, when post-punks, headbangers,
     carpetbangers, and other odd flotsam of adolescent
rage had their fifteen minutes.
     There were two young men standing in the door-
way: one was blond, the other was darker, black-
haired, and possibly Hispanic. Rocko and Paco, for
the moment.
     Rocko didn't say anything, staring at us with glazed
eyes, mouth partly open. The only good thing to say
about them was that there was simply no way they
had been taken over by alien invaders! Even monsters
know when to give someone a pass.
     "May we come in?" asked Albert.
"Stoked," said Rocko.
     There seemed no alternative to going inside; there
was no escape rocket in sight. Albert braved the
cavern of terrible noise first, then Arlene, then Jill
with our buddy. There was nothing left but for me to
go inside and witness . . .
     The living room. The place was stuffed with what
looked like the world's largest and bizarrest crank-lab.
There were chemicals of various colors in glass con-
tainers balanced precariously on the ratty furniture. A
large bottle of thick, silver liquid looked like it might
be mercury. I wondered if these guys would blow us
up or poison us.
     Jill laid the still-wrapped cybermummy on the
ground. Then Albert stepped forward. Without saying
a word, he flashed a hand-signal. I recognized it: light-
drop hand signals, based partly on American Sign
Language, heavily modified.
     Earth, said Albert.
Man, responded Paco.
     Native.
Born.
     I blinked. Albert flashed a thirteen-character com-
bination of letters and numbers, and Rocko re-
sponded with another. I raised my brows ... a hand-
signal "handshake."
     All of a sudden, Rocko's demeanor changed as his
face melted into a different one entirely. He gestured
to Paco, who closed his mouth. Both suddenly looked
fifty IQ points brighter.
     Rocko went to the stereo, a nice, state-of-the art
system out of place in these surroundings, and turned
down the music. "Let's talk," he said, voice still
sounding like a stereotypical carpetbanger.
     Things got too weird for Yours Truly. While Rocko
rapped in a lingo full of terms relating to drugs and
rock'n'roll, he produced several pads and pencils,
enough for each one of us. The real conversation took
place on the pads, while the duo spoke most of the
mind-numbing nonsense, occasionally helped out by
Albert and Jill, who could talk the talk better than
Arlene or I.
     The only part of the conversation I paid attention
to came off the pads.
     Our hosts filled in more details of this Grave New
World. Rocko was actually Captain Jerry Renfrew,
PhD, U.S. Army and head of one of the CBNW
     (chem-bio-nuke warfare) labs. His buddy was Dr.
Xavier Felix, another chemical warfare specialist.
But why did they pretend to be crystal-meth
     dealers?
Innocuous, no threat, explained Felix with a
scribble.
     Civilian DEA, Felix wrote. Pose crank cooker stuck
fake crim recs into Nat Crime Info Cen comptrs.
There was a noise halfway between a scream and a
laugh. It was Jill, and she was jumping up and down.
Out loud she said, "I haven't heard that group since I
was a kid!" The music was still blaring in the back-
ground, even though reduced to a volume that didn't
turn the brain to cottage cheese.
     On paper, Jill wrote: I did that!!!!! Mightve done
your's!
     Too young, challenged Renfrew, erasing her apos-
trophe.
     Judge/book/cover, argued Felix, added a circle slash
around the triplet, the international no-no symbol.
We passed all the notes around to everyone; but
each person got them in more or less random order. It
took me a while to make sense out of the jumble.
When everyone had seen a note, Felix or Renfrew
touched it to a Bunsen burner. The notes were written
on flash paper, and they vanished instantly with a
smokeless flare.
     According to Dr. Felix, the DEA, under alien
control, was still staffed by traitorous humans, even
now. They went hunting for people who could pro-
duce the "zombie-brew" chemical treatment used to
rework humans into zombies.
     They specifically hunted for the more sophisticated
drug-lab chemists. It made sense that Captain Ren-
frew and Felix, both infiltrating from opposite ends,
would come together.
     When Felix's hand needed a rest, the captain jotted
down: lab I headed one of few not overrun. He escaped
with all his notes and some of his equipment, grew his
hair long, and returned to alien territory to infiltrate.
Felix was already undercover, already infiltrating
the alien operation, and that's where it got tricky:
DEA knew Felix was really an agent; but they thought
he was spying on the aliens for DEA--who were
cooperating with the aliens in exchange for the prom-
ise of all drugs off the street.
     In fact, Xavier Felix was a double-double agent,
really working for the Resistance . . . unless he was a
triple-double agent, or a double-double-double agent,
in which case we were all sunk.
     Don't aliens investgt horrible noise? I wrote.
They allowed themselves to laugh out loud. At any
point in the music discussion, a laugh fit like a corpse
in potter's field.
     Evidently, excessive noise was not a problem aliens
cared much about.
     Something was torquing me off. After wrestling
with myself, I finally wrote it. How humans make
zombie brew, help aliens evin infiltrating?!?!
Renfrew stared, absently correcting something on
my note. Don't know what. He looked wounded, in
pain. Delib scrwng up recipe. Neurologic poison slow
kills drives mad. Makes useless.
     The captain bent over me and read along. He
flipped his own sheet over and added: we're only hot
chems. Others druggies cooks FDA that kind of crap.
Everyone else seemed satisfied, so I dropped it. I
was the only one, I guess, who spotted the Clue of the
Horrible Admission: even if they were screwing up
the brew so the zombies died or went mad--weren't
they still turning humans into zombies in the first
place?
     How did they live with that?
We showed them more about the cybermummy.
     They had the reaction of any scientist with a new toy.
If there were a solution, they were going to bust
humps finding it.
     They took us into the basement, where the music
from upstairs was merely loud, not ear-splitting. I was
surprised a house in Riverside had one, especially this
piece of crap. Then it hit me like a bony's fist: they
probably dug it themselves. Whatever the case, we
were in the hands of impressive dudes.
     "You can talk quietly down here without fear of
surveillance," Felix whispered.
     "Hooray," said Arlene, but kept her voice low.
"Amen," said Albert.
     We left Felix and Renfrew and went downstairs,
where we rested a moment. I was so tired I felt like the
marrow in my bones had turned to dust; or maybe I
was having trouble breathing down there. Without
intending to, I dozed off on a thick leather couch.
When I came to, the others were unwrapping the
mummy. It was embarrassing to have passed out like
that.
     "You okay, Fly?" Arlene asked over her shoulder.
"Yeah, must have been tireder than I thought," I
said. "Sorry about that."
     "No problemo," said Arlene, yawning. "I'll take the
next nap. You up to joining us?"
     I nodded and moved in for a closer look.
The cyberdude was the same as before, still a young
black man turned into a computer-age pin cushion.
Earlier, we removed enough bandages to see his face.
We uncovered his head and saw it was completely
shaved, the smooth dome covered in little metal
knobs and dials.
     As Albert and Arlene continued unwrapping, Jill
took a step back. The man wasn't wearing anything
but the quickly unwinding bandages. As they started
unwrapping below the waist, our fourteen-year-old
hellion got embarrassed. Oceans of gore she could
take without batting an eyelash, but a nude young
man was enough to make her blush.
     I was deeply amused and grateful I woke up in time
for the entertainment--Jill's reaction, I mean, not the
guy. The more nonchalant she tried to be, the more
fun I had watching. She actually turned fire-engine
red, her normally pale cheeks matching her hair.
I noticed Arlene noticing me noticing Jill. Ah,
women!
     "It's nothing to get worked up about," she told Jill.
"Maybe Jill should leave the room," suggested
Albert.
     "That's her decision," said Arlene.
"I don't want to go back upstairs with the . . .
chems," she said. "At least we can talk down here."
"Don't let them tease you, hon," Arlene said.
"Most everything you're told about sex when you're
growing up is a lie anyway."
     "You mean what they're told in school?" Albert
asked slyly.
     "I was thinking of the lies they hear at home," said
Arlene, instantly regretting the reference. We didn't
want Jill constantly fixating on the slaughter of Mom
and Dad.
     But the more serious tone affected Jill positively.
She went back to the table and helped finish the
unwrapping. She didn't look south more than about
five or six times. Seven, tops. Being a professional, I
was trained to notice details like eye movements.
"What time is it?" Arlene asked, yawning again.
She definitely deserved some sack time.
     "Ask Fly," said Jill, "he's got the cl-cl-clock."
"Why didn't they have our conference down here,
where we could talk, instead of using the pads?" asked
Arlene,
     I shrugged. "Aliens might think it was weird if
'customers' come over and the cooks disappear down
into the basement with them."
     "Won't they think it just as strange if the customers
disappear alone?"
     "Well, let's hope not."
I turned to Jill. "Earlier, you said you might be able
to communicate with him on a computer, through
one of those jacks. What's the next step?"
     She went back to examining the body with the
proper detachment. "Can you do it?" I asked.
"Yes and no."
     "Care to explain?"
"Yes I can connect, if you get me the cables I need.
One has to have a male Free-L-19, the other a male
Free-L-20, both with a two-fiber mass-serial connec-
tor at the other end."
     I sure hoped somebody else knew what the hell that
meant. "Where do you think we can get all that?"
"Try upstairs; if they don't have any, try Radio
Shack or CompUSA."
     After writing down the kind of jacks required, I
took the list upstairs and showed it to the chem guys.
They didn't have what we needed, but the captain
produced an Auto Club map and pointed out the
nearest Radio Shack.
     Kind of reassuring that L.A. still had its priorities.
Back in the basement, I asked who wanted to go.
And the result was predictable: "I'll go," said Jill.
"Anyone but Jill," I said. "Maybe I should--"
"Why can't I go?"
     "I know there's not much to do in Riverside except
shop," I admitted, "even before the demons came.
But we've been through this already, Jill. We're still in
the you're-not-expendable period."
     "I'll go," said Albert.
"Fine," I said. "Now Arlene can get some sack--"
"I'll go with him, Fly," said Arlene.
     "But you were yawning only a moment before!"
"I'm not tired now," she said, real perky.
     I did what anyone in my position would do. I
shrugged. If Arlene had surrender papers for me, I
would have signed them on the spot.
     29
Lately, I thought I was overdoing quotations
from the Book. I'd never had so vivid a recollection
for the Word until the world changed. I'd found time
to read the scriptures once more in the new era, and
now the words stayed with me, perhaps because the
altered world made the tales of the Book seem more
vivid.
     The original Mormons were condemned not only
for taking multiple wives, a behavior that might have
been cause for sympathy instead of resentment. What
upset other Americans of the nineteenth century was
the claim that God would reveal a whole new history
to newly chosen saints. The concept of Latter Day
Saints was more offensive to the Christian majority of
that time than any personal behavior or economic
consequences.
     My favorite Bible passage was John 21:25, the end
of the Gospel According to Saint John, and it should
have been the perfect shield against such prejudice;
but most Christians pay little attention to the Word:
And there are also many other things which Jesus
did, the which, if they should be written every
one, I suppose that even the world itself could
not contain the books that should be written.
Amen.
     They liked those words just fine in theory; practice
was something else again. The portions where the
Book of Mormon disagrees with established Christian
practices didn't help either. People got really upset
when they were told they were not merely wrong, but
diabolically wrong, on the subject of baptism.
Hell. Arlene and I were about to go back into hell.
We were trying to save living babies from burning in
the hell on Earth. She was a good friend and comrade.
I liked her a lot and hoped I would not witness her
death. But since becoming bold about her sinful
interest in me, she was making me uncomfortable. I
would find her a lot easier to deal with if I weren't
tempted by her.
     Or if she would consent to. . . Jesus! Give me
strength! Am I really ready to contemplate holy union?
I grimaced; it was a very big step, a life commitment,
and I was too chicken to think about it yet. I didn't
feel much older than Jill!
     My soul was troubled because I did desire Arlene. A
verse from Nephi kept running through my mind, like
a public service announcement:
     O Lord, I have trusted in thee, and I will trust in
thee forever. I will not put my trust in the arm
of flesh; for I know that cursed is he that
     putteth his faith in the arm of flesh. Yea, cursed
is he that putteth his trust in man or maketh
flesh his arm.
     "A buck for your thoughts," Arlene said, standing
very close to me. We were taking our first rest stop in
an alley. Lately, I was coming to feel safer in alleys
than in open spaces.
     "I was remembering a passage from the Book."
"You want to share it with me?" she asked. I looked
deep into her bloodshot eyes, the prettiest sight in the
world, and there was no mockery or sarcasm. I wasn't
about to tell her how hard I was trying to resist
temptation and that right now I spelled sin beginning
with a scarlet letter A.
     But there was an earlier passage from the Second
Book of Nephi that spoke directly to any warrior's
heart. I quoted it instead:
     "O Lord, wilt thou make way for mine escape
before mine enemies! Wilt thou make my path
     straight before me! Wilt thou not place a stum-
bling block in my way--but that thou wouldst
clear my way before me, a hedge not up my
     way, but the ways of mine enemy."
"Good plan," said Arlene.
     "God's plan."
She touched my arm, and I felt relaxed instead of
tense. "Albert, what if I told you I'd be willing to
study your religion to see what it's about?"
I wasn't expecting that. "Why would you do that?"
I asked, probably too suspicious. In the Marines, I got
too used to being sucker-punched by antireligious
bigots.
     "I'm not promising to convert or anything," she
told me, "but I care about you, Albert. You believe in
these things, and I want to understand."
     "Cool," I said; but I was still suspicious of her
motives.
     She dropped the other shoe: "So if I'm willing to
study what you believe, would you be willing to relax
a little and we could get together?"
     I'd expected more subtlety from someone as intelli-
gent as Arlene, but then again, Marines were not
famous for an indirect approach. I had to close my
eyes before shaking my head. I couldn't make the
word no come out.
     "I don't mean to make you uncomfortable," said
Arlene.
     "You may mean the best," I told her, "but it doesn't
matter what we do or say. Unless we're married, we
can't make love."
     "You mean we can't even fool around?" she asked.
"I mean we can't have sex together unless we're
married."
     I could tell by her expression I was a more surpris-
ing phenomenon than the spidermind. "You're kid-
ding," she said. "Not even touching?"
     "Not sexual touching." I wished she'd let up!
She looked away from me, almost shyly. "I'm only
talking about a little fun."
     I tried a new tack. "How can you think of fun when
the world is dying?"
     "Seems like a good time to me," she said. "We
could use a break."
     "Arlene, any sex outside of marriage is fornication,
even just touching. That kind of touching. The sin is
in the thought."
     She mumbled something. I could have sworn she
asked, "How about inside marriage?" But she turned
away and pretended she hadn't spoken. I suppose
Arlene was as freaked about the thought as I was.
I didn't think I was making the best possible case
for my faith, but God isn't about winning a popularity
contest. He doesn't have to.
     "Albert, if you ever feel differently, I'll be there for
you." I could tell she'd run out of things to say. At this
moment, I probably seemed more alien than a steam-
demon or a bony.
     Fortunately, the rest break was over. I pointed to
my watch and Arlene nodded. We could return to the
far less dangerous territory of fighting monsters in
hell. At least I knew what to expect from them.
Nothing else stood between us and the Radio Shack
except the corpses of some dead dogs. We broke into
the abandoned store, kicking in the inadequately
padlocked door. We used our day-night goggles to
hunt through the darkness, not wanting to use a
betraying light. A number of large spiderwebs were
spun across a wall of boom boxes, proof that one
Earth life form might survive the invasion un-
changed. I was surprised that the store didn't seem to
have been looted . . . but then, what for?
     "We should be able to find the jacks for Jill," said
Arlene, who giggled right afterward. It took me a
moment to recognize what was funny.
     She was right, though. In the store's unlooted
condition, we found the jacks very quickly. She
pocketed them and headed for the front of the store,
but stopped at a counter. Something had caught her
eye; I couldn't see what.
     "I need to ask you a question," she said.
"Ask away."
     "Do you love someone?"
"That's a very personal question."
     "That's why I'm asking," she followed up. "Do
you?"
     She deserved an answer. "Yes, but she's dead."
"You never made love to her?"
     "She died before we married."
"Thank you for telling me," she said. "I'm not
trying to probe you, Albert. I've succeeded in reveal-
ing too much of myself. Now let's get back before I say
something else stupid."
     She went out the door, and I glanced at the counter
to see a demo music CD of Golden Oldies, led off by
Carly Simon singing "Nobody Does it Better." I'd
never heard the song but I could imagine the subject
matter. Jesus help us; was this a divine retribution? I
shuddered; I hadn't seen any rainbows since the
invasion.
     We didn't exchange another word on the way back.
Her expression was grim, hard. She was probably
angry with herself for opening up to me without
finding out first how I really felt. Nonreligious people
usually had this trouble with us. We really meant it.
No wonder we came off like nuts. How could I tell
Arlene that she was probably allergic to nuts?
30
     I let Jill take the next nap on the couch. For a
crazy moment I envied the mummy for sleeping so
long. Jill didn't seem all that rested when Arlene and
Albert returned, but any sleep had to be better than
none.
     Jill asked if there was any coffee, and it turned out
that the chems stored it in the basement. Hot-tap
coffee helped bring her around, and with dark circles
under her eyes and still yawning, she got to work on
the man who was no longer a mummy but still plenty
cyber.
     She attached the necessary wires, brought up her
ultramicro and started hacking. I still had my doubts
that this would actually work; but the more excited
Jill became, the more I was converted.
     Then she said the magic words, "Yes, yes, yes!" and
got up to pump her arm and strut like a guy. I doubt
that sex will ever give her that much excitement.
About a minute passed while she fiddled with the
TracPad, listening to handshaking routines on the
audio-out. She gave the first report: "I've made con-
tact with his brain at seventeen thirty-two. His name
is Kenneth Estes."
     "Does he know where he is?" I asked.
Jill hesitated, and then spelled it out: "He thinks
he's dead and in hell."
     "Can we talk to him?" I asked.
"Yup," said Jill. "I can type questions, and you can
read his answers. But you have to scan through the
random crap; it's a direct link to Ken's brain."
"All right, you interpret," I replied. "The first thing
is find out who he is and why he's important enough
for demon gift-wrapping."
     Arlene sat up on the couch where she'd almost
dozed off. This could well be too interesting to miss.
Albert sat in a chair, but he was wide-awake. Jill
tapped for a long moment at her tiny keyboard, using
all ten fingers, much to my surprise. I thought all
hackers were two-finger typists, it was a law or some-
thing. She read the first part of the man's story:
"As I said, his name's Ken Estes. He's a computer
software designer slumming as a CIA analyst. Low-
level stuff, not a field agent or anything. He was born
in--"
     "No time for the family background," I inter-
rupted. "Keep him focused on how and why he
     became a cybermummy."
Somewhere, water was dripping. I hadn't noticed it
before, but it was very annoying while waiting for Jill
to pass on the messages in silence. Finally, she spoke
again: "When the aliens landed and started the war,
Ken was told by his superiors that the agency had
developed a new computer which the operator
     accessed in V.R. mode."
"What's V.R.?" Albert asked.
     "Old term; this guy's in his thirties! Virtual Reality;
we call it burfing now, from 'body surfing,' I think."
"Oh, the net," said Albert.
     "We'll go back to school later," I jumped in. "Get
on with it, Jill!"
     "High-ranking officers within the agency induced
Ken to accept the implants 'for the good of the United
States.' Told him he'd be able to help fight the aliens.
Instead, it turned out they were traitors within the
Company--"
     Jill stopped for a moment, swallowing hard. She
took another sip of coffee before continuing. We were
back to her deep disgust for human traitors. She made
herself read on. She wouldn't be guilty of dereliction
of duty.
     The high-ranking officers had cooperated with the
aliens, joining a criminal conspiracy against the coun-
try they were sworn to defend--and incidentally,
against their own species. Ken "told" us more
through Jill: Company 'borged me, attached me to
alien net, one not part conspiracy waited too long, tried
to save killed conspiratora-tora-tora befora took him
out. . .
     "How did the aliens intend to use him?" I asked.
Jill asked, and the answer came: Hoped him conduit
betwalien biotechputer netputer and webwide human
d'bases crlsystems.
     "Jeez, it's like a sci-fi James Joyce," I said. "From
now on, you interpret, Jill. It gives me a headache!"
"We live in a science fiction world," said Arlene,
wandering over from the couch, wide-awake, as Ken's
tale unfolded. "Fly, I'd like to ask a question," she
said.
     "Be my guest."
"Jill, would you ask him how much of the alien
technology was biologically based?"
     Jill asked and passed on: "Ken says that all the alien
technology is biotech, except for stuff they stole from
subject races, like the rocket technology for the flying
skulls."
     "Yes!" exclaimed Arlene, as excited as Jill at a
moment of vindication. "We've been on the right
track all along, Fly. The original enemy went as far
with biological techniques as they possibly could.
Perhaps the first species they conquered lived on the
same planet, but had a mechanical technology they
were able to adapt to their own use. Eventually, they
conquered the Gate builders; we monkeyed with the
Gates, turned them on, and the invaders poured
through. That would explain why in any choice be-
tween organic and mechanical, they always opt for the
biological."
     "And it would also explain why our own technology
shows up in odd places," I agreed, "and why they use
firearms."
     "They're pragmatic," said Albert. "Their study of
us proves that, these demonic forms they take."
I tried to get the show back on the road: "Jill, can he
tell us how they communicate with one another?"
There was a long stretch before Jill helped us out
with our immediate communication needs. "He says
it hurts to think about this, but he will. He ...
realizes we're free. I've told him a little about us and
... he does want to help."
     "Tell him we appreciate anything he can do," I said.
Another moment passed and he answered the ques-
tion beyond my expectation: "There are neural path-
ways integrated into the computers. Psi-connections
carry all the orders. The aliens don't need to tell their
slaves what to do! They merely think the orders, but
it's different than merely thinking. No word. Project?
Psimulcast?"
     "Does Ken know where the commands originate?"
I asked.
     "He doesn't understand the question," Jill an-
swered quickly.
     "Uh, I'm not asking if he knows where the ultimate
leaders happen to be right now. But does he know
how the chain of command functions for the inva-
sion?"
     Jill's forehead showed some extra furrows as she
passed on my thoughts, probably doing some translat-
ing along the way. Finally, Ken passed on a detailed
report, filtered through Jill.
     "Question is meaningless; no hierarchy."
"Hive culture? Collective?"
     "Nope; they just. .. huh? Uh, they just all do the
same thing. The aliens themselves; the slaves--I
think that means everyone not part of 'the people'--
fight like crazy. That's why they're not 'the people.'"
"Can Ken issue commands?"
     "Fly, that's what he was made for! Receive alien
commands and convey them to human systems."
     "I mean, the other way 'round?"
She tapped, stared. "He doesn't understand the
question. It's like he's not allowed to think about it or
see the question. Some sort of protected-mode thing
firm-wired in. Wait, he's talking again . ..
"This 'invasion fleet' is actually an exploration
fleet. Highest-intel aliens are the entities inside the
spiderminds. Send out fleets, probe, when feasible
conquer alien worlds, no reason other than raw pow-
er. Well, Ken can't understand the reason, if there is
one.
     "Slave masters with an expanding empire, but more
interested in finding new genetic material to absorb
into their web-of-life--which is how they think of
it--than they are in having new individual slaves . . .
especially short-lived, contentious slaves."
Jill stopped talking and took off the headphones,
rubbing a hand across her forehead. "Are you all
right?" asked Arlene.
     "Little headache. I'll be all right," she said.
"You need to stop?" I asked.
     "No. Hey, I just had a brainstorm! If we could get
Ken jacked into one of the alien terminals and
override the safeties, we could sabotage their net!"
"Brilliant idea," I said. "Why didn't I think of
that?" I winked. "Maybe we could sabotage their
entire technology base."
     "There's a problem. When he's connected to the
net, there are built-ins that override his human voli-
tion. The monitor can't take over the CPU."
     "It can if it has its own chip set and special
programming," muttered Arlene.
     "The program that shuts off his brain must have a
'front end' somewhere in his brain," Jill said--to
herself, I presumed. "If I can find it, I can disable it,
or I'm not Jill Hoerchner."
     "Are you?" asked my pal.
Jill glanced over at her and added, "I'd need a quiet
place where I can be undisturbed for several days.
Days, not hours."
     There were several hundred questions I wanted to
ask Ken; but we heard a loud noise from upstairs. It
didn't sound like more of the headbanger music. It
sounded like heavy feet thumping around upstairs.
Maybe it was aliens coming to pick up their supply of
zombie brew.
     I was pissed that the chems hadn't warned us when
these "guests" would pay them a visit; then I realized
that the aliens wouldn't stick to any kind of set
program. All the more reason for the captain and the
doctor to maintain their act.
     Very quietly, Arlene flicked off the one light in the
basement ceiling. We sat in the dark. We heard raised
voices; the chems were denying that they'd seen a
human "strike team" or a human wrapped in ban-
dages.
     I heard the telltale hiss of imp talk; I held my breath
. . . there were a lot of feet tramping around up there.
A new kind of voice spoke next, a grating, metallic
monotone. It sounded like a robot from an old sci-fi
movie, or something speaking through a vocoder.
Once this voice entered the conversation, our hu-
man allies sounded frantic. I had a bad feeling about
this. Good agents would put on a believable act. Good
agents would stick to the part, right to the point of
death. But were they?
     The next sound we heard was all too familiar: a
powerful explosion shook the house, followed by the
smell of fire from above. Before we could even think
about acting, there was another explosion, and now
smoke began to drift down the wooden steps to our
hiding place.
     We listened to the alien storm troopers start tearing
the place apart. They'd convinced me of their sinceri-
ty in trying to find us. I huddled the others and said:
"The bastards will find the basement. Our only hope
is if the cooks dug an escape tunnel, one that exits
from here."
     Keeping the light off didn't make it any easier, but I
hadn't noticed a tunnel when we could see. If my pipe
dream produced a real pipe, the opening would be
hidden anyway. We rummaged through spare equip-
ment, desperately trying not to make noise. The stuff
was mainly metal, so the process wasn't easy.
The chems had stored their chemical stuff in the
basement. Tanks of volatiles, glassware, a fire extin-
guisher, jars and jars of chemicals (and I was grateful
the glass was thick). There were plenty of shelves and
books. And nowhere behind any of this did we find a
secret opening.
     We hunted the walls, shaking bookcases that might
be doors, checking fireplaces for hidden holes, any-
thing at all! I was about to give up when my hands
came to rest on a bookcase that seemed bolted down,
unlike the others.
     I started tugging on various books to see if one of
them was a trigger mechanism. Two things happened
simultaneously. First, I found a book that wouldn't
move. Never had I been happier to find something
stuck.
     Second, with a triumphant howling, the imps found
the trapdoor and flung it wide, letting light pour into
the basement.
     We froze; I was a statue holding up the bookshelf;
Albert stood nearby, holding the naked Ken in a
fireman's carry; Jill was part of that tableau, holding
her CompMac ultramicro, still jacked into Ken; and
Arlene was on the other side of the basement room, in
the gloom. Of the five of us, Ken did the best job of
playing dead, but he had an unfair advantage.
A thing dropped down the open trap.
     This baby looked vaguely humanoid--oh, they
were keeping at it--but definitely alien. The yellow-
white, naked body maintained the hell motif so
popular with the invaders. No obvious genitalia. The
arms and legs were unusually small and thin. The
most outstanding feature was the way the skin rippled
like bubbling marshmallows over an open fire. I
wondered if this might be one of their enslaved races.
As it came closer, it dawned on me why the spindly
limbs were irrelevant to its effectiveness in battle. The
new monster was hot. I mean, fires-of-hell-make-
your-eyeballs-pop hot. No wonder the skin rippled
from the amazing heat. He was like a mirage in the
desert made into burning sulfur-flesh, the most "hell-
ish" creature yet.
     There were books on the shelf right next to it. They
burst into flame from his proximity, lighting the
room, and the wood of the shelf charred right before
our eyes. Maybe it was an optical illusion, but it
appeared that actual flames danced along the thing's
skin. The little voice in the back of my head started
shrieking: Saved the best for last! The trouble with the
little voice was that it was so damned optimistic.
As the living torch moved closer, I saw its eyes
weren't really eyes--more like a ring of flaming dots
so bright that it hurt to look at them. I wondered how
we might appear to this creature; I also wished I had a
barrel of ice water to throw on the uninvited guest.
The others were as confused as their fearless leader.
Arlene was able to fire off a short burst from her AB-
10. The thing didn't even react, but Arlene's machine
pistol became so hot she had to drop it. Then the fire-
thing moved between the others and Yours Truly,
focusing on me.
     Having cut me off, the monster put on a little magic
act. It was so bright, I couldn't turn away, no matter
how painful. . . and I watched its body actually con-
tract, becoming brighter as it squeezed together--like
it was about to explode.
     Training took over, the healthy respect we were
taught for all kinds of explosives. I had no desire to
become Marine flambe.
     I dove to the side, screaming inarticulately; every-
one got the idea, falling flat, trying to cover himself.
Fireboy exploded, a blast lancing out and disintegrat-
ing the bookshelf where I had stood a moment before.
Albert threw himself over Ken's body, then left Ken
on the floor and grabbed his Uzi clone. We had all the
light we could use.
     The big Mormon opened fire. The big gun actually
sounded soft compared to the horrific explosion from
the alien, but the result was the same as with Arlene.
Did the thing generate a heat field around its immedi-
ate body surface, heat so intense that bullets dissolved
before getting through?
     One good plan was growing in my head: run away!
This was a much better plan than it sounded. Rising
shakily to my feet, I could see quite clearly the tunnel
we'd been trying to find. The shelf I'd been exploring
had indeed covered the exit, and the explosion had
done a superb job of open sesame. I considered how to
rescue the others, or at least Jill and Ken. The mission
wasn't a burnout case yet.
     For some reason, the fire monster seemed to have a
thing for me; it targeted me again. I recognized the
telltale signs. Looking right at me (if those black dots
counted for eyes), it began to contract, powering up
for another burst.
     Before I ended my career as a piece of toast, Arlene
came to the rescue. She got right behind the monster
and opened fire from behind. Having learned her
lesson about wasting bullets on this guy, she used the
fire extinguisher.
     Never discourage initiative, that's my motto!
She sprayed the thing, snarling, "Goddamned fire-
eater!" It was the best name she'd invented in quite a
while.
     The monster screamed. The fire extinguisher was
actually extinguishing the fire! This suggested a whole
new approach to dealing with the monsters: properly
labeled household appliances could restore Heaven
on Earth.
     Arlene kept pouring the foam on the fire-eater, who
was making a sound somewhere between a screeching
cat and sizzling bacon. If the Marine Corps were
around after we'd saved the world, I'd recommend a
special medal for Arlene as master of unconventional
weaponry: first the chainsaw, now the safety equip-
ment.
     I have the highest possible regard for women who
save my life.
     "Move out!" I bellowed to one and all, issuing one
of my favorite orders. Everyone liked the idea just
fine. Except for one imp, that is, without the brains to
avoid tough Marines who had just stopped a monster
compared to which an imp isn't fit to light cigars.
Imps aren't generally all that bright, of course, so I
don't know why I was surprised. The ugly little sucker
dropped through the hole and threw a flaming wad of
snot that I refused to take seriously. On the other
hand, one of those wads cashed the chips of Bill
Ritch. The thought made me doubly mad, so ...
I returned fire with my double-barreled, thinking
how I actually preferred an honest, all-American duck
gun like this one to the fascist, pump-action variety.
Yeah! The imp split down the middle, the guts making
a Rorschach test. Better than a riot gun, no question
about it.
     We hauled ass down the tunnel as I ran our list of
liabilities. There was only one, actually, but it was big.
If we'd gotten the shelf open and closed behind us,
we'd have a decent chance right now. However, all the
monsters in the world knew where we'd gone, and the
hordes would be hot on our heels.
     Reinforcing this idea was the hissing, growling,
slithering, wheezing, roaring, shlumping, and thud-
thud-thudding a few hundred meters behind us.
There was nothing to do but run like thieves in the
night.
     Arlene brought the fire extinguisher with her; God
knows why, unless we ran into another of our brand-
new playmates. Albert and Jill were strapped, so their
hands were free to carry Ken. Poor Ken. The way he
was getting knocked around, bruised, and cut, he
would have been doing a lot better if the bandages had
been left on. If we got out of this, I promised to buy
him a whole new body bandage.
     The tunnel, winding snakelike, was terribly narrow,
lined with raw earth and occasionally propped with
wooden braces. The little voice in the back of my
head insisted we were perfectly all right, so long as the
passage wasn't blocked. This was the same voice that
always told me to leave the umbrella home right
before the heaviest rainfall of the year.
     Now, it's not like we hit a real cave-in. If we had,
we'd simply have died right there. But a partial cave-
in we could deal with.
     Albert threw his massive frame at the wall of dirt,
and it shifted. We were slowed down by Jill and
Arlene pushing Ken through, while Albert yanked
from the other side. I guarded the rear with the
shotgun loaded, ready for bear. No bears.
     A few feet ahead, we hit the outside of a huge pipe
and found a hole buzz-cut right through it. We opened
it, and I wished I'd left my olfactory senses back on
Mars.
     "Ew!" said Jill, another unsolicited but insightful
commentary.
     Sewer main. We were assailed by the odor of
methane.
     "Dive in, the offal's fine!" said Arlene cheerfully.
The sound of our pursuers only fifty meters back
made the idea a lot more appealing. We could hear
their raspy breathing.
     We ducked into the sewers, very careful that Ken
shouldn't accidentally drown. We'd come this far
together, and he was starting to feel like a member of
the family.
     As we ran we heard the last sound anyone wants to
hear underground: the roar and whoosh of a rocket. I
crashed into the others, making Albert drop Ken.
Something heavy, smelling of burnt copper, whizzed
over our heads; a nasty little rocket that just started to
curve, heat-seeking, but couldn't quite make the turn.
It blew a hole in the pipe instead.
     And I'd thought the tunnel smelled bad before!
I shook the dust out of my eyes and coughed, then
lifted Jill from the ground. Tears were pouring down
her face, but she wasn't crying; my eyes were watering
too. Albert jerked Arlene to her feet, and they both
checked on Ken, who was lying facedown with a pile
of dirt on his head.
     Jill opened his mouth, shoveled the dirt out, and
made sure he hadn't swallowed his tongue. He
coughed, and Jill got to her feet, handing Ken off like
a sack of wheat. I loved watching a fourteen-year-old
do what was considered criminal in the previous
world: act like an adult.
     "Over here," yelled Albert, pointing to a small
hatch leading to a cramped corridor. The monsters
were big; they'd have a hard time following.
Albert went first, probably not a good idea. I
preferred Jill and Arlene in front. If we were am-
bushed from behind, the girls might still get through,
and Albert and I could hold off the Bad Guys; the
mission would go on.
     But it was too late to do anything about it now. At
least we knew that anywhere Albert went, the rest of
us could easily follow. I brought up the rear, hanging
back to delay, if necessary.
     The corridor walls were lined with pipes. When I
caught up with the others, they were trying to open a
pressure hatch at the far end. I brought bad luck with
me--the sound of another rocket.
     Albert and I dived left, Arlene and Jill right, taking
Ken with them. Our actions confused the heat-seeker:
it turned partially starboard, exploding and rupturing
several pipes. Again we had the fun of choking and
gagging on a huge burst of methane.
     Albert grunted as he turned the difficult pressure
hatch; we heard the gratifying sound of metal grinding
against metal. He didn't open the portal a moment
too soon.
     Looking back, I saw imps, zombies, and one bony.
That answered the question of who'd been firing
rockets. Bringing up their rear was either another fire-
eater or the one Arlene had sprayed with the foam. If
the latter, he'd be looking for payback.
     Arlene stepped up, fire extinguisher pointed, ready
for round two. I suddenly remembered something
from my raucous high school daze. "No!" I shouted.
"Get back! Get through the hatch right now!"
She got.
     Coming out last, I slammed the hatch shut and
spun the wheel. "That's not going to last," said
Albert.
     "Won't need to," I said, backing away. "Everybody,
get way back!"
     Albert's face was a mask of puzzlement; then it
dawned on him what was about to happen.
     "Hope you all really like barbecue," I addressed the
troops. "Hey, Arlene. Remember when they built the
L.A. subway?"
     "Yeah . . ." she said, scowling, still confused.
The mother of all gas explosions rocked us off our
feet, blowing the hatch clean off its hinges; the flying
metal could have killed any of us in the path.
I staggered to my feet. It didn't take a lot of nerve to
go over and check on the results; just a strong stom-
ach. Nothing survived that explosion, not even the
fire-eater.
     As I peered into the maw of hell, I saw nothing left
of the alien pursuers except shreds of flesh and a fine
mist of alien blood. And of course the lingering odor
of sour lemons.
     "What happened?" asked Jill, stunned. At least, I
assume that's what she asked; all I could hear was a
long, loud alarm bell.
     I'd counted on the fire-eater; thankfully, it was hot
enough to set off the methane.
     Jill was completely recovered from being stunned.
She jumped up and down and shouted something,
probably some contemporary equivalent of yowza.
We old folk were still a little shell-shocked as we
continued along the sewer. After several twists and
turns, it dawned on us we were lost.
     Arlene had a compass, and now was the time to use
it. "We've got a problem," she said; I was just starting
to be able to hear again. "It shows a different direc-
tion every time."
     "Electric current in the pipe switches," I said.
"Take averages, figure out a rough west."
     No matter where we were and what was happening,
the watchwords must be "Go west, go west." We'd
find the computer in L.A., so the President had told
us; hope he knew what he was talking about. There,
we guaranteed a reckoning the enemy would long
remember.
     31
We continued westward until we finally
     emerged several klicks from where we'd entered.
Night was falling again. We'd had a busy day.
"Transportation," Albert pointed out. We beheld
an old Lincoln Continental, covered in some kind of
crud halfway between rust and slime, making it
impossible to determine its original color. It probably
had an automatic transmission; the mere thought
made me shudder.
     Albert went over and opened the unlocked door.
There was no key. "I'll bet it still runs," he said, lying
down on the seat so he could look up at the steering
column. He did violence to the crappy housing and
started fiddling with the wires. A moment later the
engine coughed into life.
     "You hot-wired the car," said Jill, impressed.
"Sure," he said.
     "I'm surprised you'd know how to do that," she
said.
     "Why?" he asked, getting out of the dinosaur.
"Was that part of sniper training?" Jill wanted to
know.
     "Part of my troubled youth."
"I wish more Mormons were like you," she told
him.
     "The Church was good for me, Jill," he told her. "It
turned my life around."
     "Which way were you facing?" she asked jokingly.
"Toward hell," he said.
     "You're still facing that way," observed Arlene,
"every time you take a step."
     "Yes," he agreed, "but now I'm able to fight it. I'd
rather blast a demon than give him my soul."
We'd had this conversation before. I preferred
opting out this time. Arlene didn't mind a dose of
deja vu, apparently, but then, she was sweet on the
guy. "They're aliens," she said.
     "Sure," he agreed. "But for me, they're demons
too."
     One man's image of terror is another man's joy
ride. Speaking of which, the old Lincoln was enough
of a monster for me. I was half sorry it still ran. A
quick look at the gas gauge told the story: half a tank,
plenty to make it to Los Angeles.
     One thing about an old family car: there was plenty
of room for our family, including Ken propped up
between Jill and Arlene in the backseat. I was happy
to let Albert drive. I rode shotgun.
     Albert flipped on the lights in the twilight and
triumphantly announced, "They work!"
     "Great," I said. "Now turn them off."
"Oh, right," he said like a little boy caught playing
with the wrong toy. We drove along without lights,
heading toward the diminished glow of Ellay.
"Do you have a new plan?" Arlene asked.
     Glancing in the rearview mirror, I saw that Jill was
sleeping. "Of course," I said. "Always. I think we
should hijack a plane, elude any pursuit--"
     "Yeah," Albert interrupted. "I wonder if they have
any aircraft? I haven't seen any."
     "Maybe they're using zombie pilots," Arlene com-
mented hopefully. Zombie pilots would not have fast
reflexes.
     "So, as I was saying," I continued, "we take our
plane and hot-tail it to Hawaii. There we find the War
Technology Center and take them Ken. With help
from Jill, we plug Ken into the bionet and crash the
whole, friggin' alien system."
     "Good plan," said Albert.
"Ditto," said Arlene.
     It was good to be appreciated. With a proper
respect for Yours Truly, I might yet help Arlene to find
God. I was certain that Albert wouldn't mind that.
"Wonder if there'll be monsters at the city limits,"
said Albert at length.
     "Don't see why they'd have that much organiza-
tion," I answered, "after what we've seen. What do
you think, Arlene?" I asked, glancing into the rear-
view mirror again. She'd joined Jill in the Land of
Nod. Given the condition of Ken Estes, the backseat
had become the sleeping compartment of this particu-
lar train.
     "The girls are taking forty," commented Albert
with a touch of envy.
     "How are you holding up?" I asked.
"Driving in the dark without lights keeps the old
adrenaline flowing."
     "I know what you mean. But if you can use some
relief, I'll spell you."
     He risked taking his eyes off the black spread of
road long enough to glance over. "You're all right,
Fly. I see why Arlene respects you so much."
"She's told you that?"
     "Not in so many words. But it's an easy tell."
We both tried to discern something of the road. The
horizon was bright, in contrast to the darkness right
in front of us. It was that time of day. I rubbed my
eyes, suddenly starting to lose it.
     "Why don't you take a nap?" he suggested.
"No. Should at least be two of us awake, and I want
to make sure you're one of them."
     "Right."
Exhausted but too wired to sleep, we made it into
Los Angeles at night. We didn't run into any monster
patrols on the way. Maybe they were saving up some
real doozies for us at the Beverly Center.
     At the outskirts of the city, zombie guards shuffled
back and forth in a caricature of military discipline.
Even a zombie would have noticed our approach if
we'd had the headlights on. Score one for basic
procedure.
     Albert took a side road, but we ran into the same
problem. "How long do I keep this up?" he asked.
"All night, I'd say, if I hadn't prepared for this."
"How?"
     "I didn't throw out the lemons we didn't get around
to using before. I wrapped them in plastic wrap from
the MREs. We still have them with us."
     "To borrow from Jill, ick!" he said. "Who's been
carting around that rotting crap?"
     "You, Bubba!"
"Just for that, Fly, you get to wake the girls." The
man knew a thing or two about revenge.
     We parked and I woke up Jill first. Then I let Jill
risk tapping Arlene on the shoulder. Some tough
Marines you wake with kid gloves--or better yet,
with a kid. Arlene came to with a start, but she was
good. Very good.
     The night air felt pleasantly cool. As we spoiled it
with spoiled citrus, Jill asked, "What about Ken?"
"Lime and lemon him too," said Arlene. "We've all
got to be the same to the zombie noses."
     "So, walk or ride?" asked Albert.
"Don't see any reason to give up these wheels
before we have to," I said, amazing myself, consider-
ing how I regarded the old Lincoln. "With the win-
dows down, we ought to pass."
     "I look dead enough to keep driving," said Albert.
We all piled back in, thought rancid, graveyard
thoughts, and rolled.
     As we approached the first zombie checkpoint, I
started worrying. There hadn't been any other cars
around. But we'd seen a fleet of trucks with zombie
drivers back in Buckeye. I'd have felt a lot better if we
weren't the only car.
     Suddenly we were rammed from behind. A truck
had hit us. It didn't have lights. One good view in the
side mirror revealed a zombie driver. "Don't react," I
hissed to everyone, fearing a volley of gunfire at the
wrong moment. Everyone kept his cool.
     "We weren't hit very hard," I said. The truck was
barely tooling along, at about the same slow approach
speed we were doing. "Everyone all right?" I asked
quietly.
     While I received affirmatives, the zombie driver
demonstrated some ancient, primitive nerve impulse
that had survived from the human days of Los Ange-
les. The fughead leaned on his horn. All of a sudden, I
completely relaxed. Getting past the checkpoint was
going to be a cinch.
     "Shall I take us in, Corporal?" asked Albert, obvi-
ously on the same wavelength.
     "Hit it, brother," I said.
The truck stuck close to our bumper through the
totally porous checkpoint. After that, we just drove in
typical L.A. style, weaving drunkenly between
zombie-driven trucks, leaning on our horn, all the
time heading for the ever popular LAX. I wanted to
give the airport the biggest laxative it had ever had
with Lemon Marine Suppositories. Cleans out those
unsightly monsters every time!
     32
We dumped the car in one of the over-
     crowded LAX parking lots. Lot C, in fact. There was
real joy in not worrying about finding a parking place,
and an even greater pleasure in not worrying about
remembering it.
     We only had to hop a single fence to get where we
were going, in the time-honored tradition of hijack-
ers, and Ken didn't weigh very much. A thought
crossed my mind. "So, uh, one of us knows how to fly
a plane, right?"
     "Better than flying it wrong," Arlene said.
"No time for jarhead humor," I said. "Gimmie an
answer."
     "Funny," said Arlene, quite seriously, "but I was
about to ask the same question. Really."
     We both looked at Albert. "I'd been planning to
take lessons, but I never got around to it," he admit-
ted sadly.
     "How hard can it be?" I asked, recalling the words
of an old movie character.
     We infiltrated the refueling area for the big jets, and
I found the perfect candidate: an ancient C-5 Air
Force transport, which could easily make it all the
way to Hawaii. Assuming somebody could drive it.
Everyone was already doing a good zombie perfor-
mance, although I still thought Jill was overdoing it.
Ken was propped between Albert and me, and we
were able to make it look like he was stumbling along
with us. We prepared to tramp up the ramp, joining a
herd of other zombies.
     A pair of Clydes waited at the entrance. Damn the
luck! We could pass for zombies among zombies, but I
wasn't at ail sure about these guys,
     They were disarming each zombie as it entered the
plane. It was a perfectly reasonable precaution, con-
sidering how zombies acted in close quarters when
they were jostled, pushed, pulled ... or damn near
anything else. I couldn't blame the Clydes for not
wanting the plane to be suddenly depressurized, but
the idea of being disarmed was not at all appealing.
We did some shifting around, then hit the ramp
with myself in the lead, the other four right behind
me, four abreast with Jill and Ken on the inside. Jill
did as good a job as I had of keeping Ken's end up.
This makeshift plan could work if the Clydes were
bored.
     Sure enough, they barely paid attention as we
simply took our heavy artillery and tossed them on
the pile outside the plane. Bye-bye, shotgun. This left
us with nothing but the pistols hidden inside our
jackets.
     We stuck close to each other, lost in the zombie
mob, as the plane started to taxi; then we worked our
way up front. The Clydes were in the back, huddled
and talking about something. By the time the plane
lifted off, giving me that rush I always get from
takeoff, we were close enough to the front that we
could duck behind the curtain leading to the cockpit
door. I took it on myself to give it a gentle push.
The door opened inward, revealing a pair of imps
hovering over a strange globe, another product of
alien technology, bolted to the floor. The monsters
appeared to be driving the plane through the use of
this pulsing, humming, buzzing ball. It gave me a
headache just looking at it; biotech made me need a
Pepto-Bismol. The glistening, sweating device was
connected to the instrument panel.
     The imps' backs were to us. They were so preoccu-
pied with their task, they didn't even turn around
when we entered. I closed the door quietly and locked
it.
     From the cockpit I saw Venus ... we were going the
wrong way, due east!
     This simply would not do. I pointed at the imps,
and then at Arlene. She nodded. We stepped forward,
pistols in hand, and the barrels of our guns touched
the back of imp heads at exactly the same instant.
The little voice in the back of my head chose that
instant to open its fat yap and suggest that Arlene and
I should say something to the imps, on the order of,
"We're hijacking this plane to Hawaii. We never did
have a proper honeymoon!"
     But there was no way to give an imp orders, other
than Fall down, you're dead! We'd simply take over
the plane. After we killed the imps.
     I'm certain that Arlene and I fired at the same
moment. The idle thoughts passing through my mind
couldn't have affected the results.
     But something went wrong.
The imp Arlene tapped went down and stayed
     down. She put two more bullets in him, almost by
reflex, to make certain that the job was good and
done. I should have been able to take care of one lousy
imp, after the way we'd exterminated ridiculous num-
bers of zombies, demons, ghosts, and pumpkins.
One lousy imp! At the closest possible range! The
head turned ever so slightly as I squeezed the trigger.
Somehow the bullet went in at an angle that didn't
put the imp down.
     Turning around, screaming, it flung one flaming
snotball. One lousy snotball. I dived to the left. Arlene
was already out of the line of fire, on the right, taking
care of the other one. Jill crouched, fingers stuck in
her ears, trying to keep out the loud reverberations of
the shots in the enclosed space. Albert could have
done the same.
     But Albert froze. As much of a pro as he was, he
stood there with the dumb expression of a deer caught
in the headlights, right before road kill. Maybe Albert
had a little voice in the back of his head, and it had
chosen that moment to bug him. Or maybe it was
such a foregone conclusion that these imps were toast,
he'd let down his guard, taking a brief mental rest at
precisely the wrong moment.
     The fireball struck him dead-center in the face.
I remembered losing Bill Ritch that way.
     It didn't seem right to survive all the firepower this
side of the goddamned sun, and then cash in on
something so trivial. It made me so mad, the cockpit
vanished in a haze of red. It was like I'd mainlined
another dose of that epinephrine stuff from Deimos.
I dropped my gun and jumped on the imp, beating
at it with my fists, tearing at it with my teeth. I was
screaming louder than poor Albert, writhing on the
floor holding his face.
     Hands were on me from behind, trying to pull me
off, little hands. Jill was behind me, yelling something
in my ear I couldn't understand; but the part of me
that didn't want to hurt Jill won out over the part that
wanted to rip the imp apart with my fingernails.
Letting go seemed a bad idea, though; there'd be
nothing stopping it from tossing the fireballs to fry us
all. Then I heard Arlene shouting something about a
"clear shot," and I suddenly remembered the inven-
tion of firearms.
     The caveman jumped out of the way to give Cockpit
Annie the target she wanted. She pumped round after
round into the imp's open mouth. He never closed it.
He never raised his claw hands again.
     Of course, while we were encountering these diffi-
culties, there was a commotion outside. I guess we
had made a bit of noise.
     One of the zombies tried the door. The lock held for
now. Sanity returned, and I helped the blinded Albert
get up, casually noticing that he hadn't taken any of
the flaming stuff down his throat or nose. He might
live.
     In the distance we heard gunshots and curses. The
Clydes must have been forcing their way forward,
shooting any zombies in their way. Suddenly, I was
grateful that the plane was a sardine can of solid,
reworked flesh.
     "Okay, moment of truth," said Arlene, the mantle
of command falling on her there and then. It's not
something I'd wish on my worst enemy. "Who's going
to fly this damned thing?" she asked in the tones of a
demand, not a question.
     The gunshots crept close. We had perhaps a minute.
"I will," said Jill in a small voice; but with confi-
dence. I remembered her stint in the truck with some
trepidation. Then I remembered how she stayed be-
hind the wheel after a missile tried to take her head
off.
     "You didn't tell us you could fly one of these," I
said, getting my voice back.
     "You didn't ask," she said. It sounded like one of
those old comedy routines, but without a laugh track.
It wasn't funny.
     "Jill," I said, "have you ever flown a plane before?"
"Kind of."
     "Kind of? What the hell does that mean?"
A zombie threw itself against the door, where
Albert still moaned. He braced himself, still fighting,
still a part of the team.
     She sighed. "Okay, I haven't really flown; but I'm a
wizard at all the different flight simulators!"
Arlene and I stared at each other with mounting
horror. I hated to admit it, even to myself, but my
experience bringing down the mail rocket--with a
high-tech program helping every mile of the way--
probably qualified me less to fly the C-5 than Jill with
her simulators.
     "All right?" I said to Arlene.
"Right," she answered, shrugging, then went to
hook up Ken.
     I helped Jill look for jacks on the glistening biotech.
She was more willing to touch it than I was. She found
what she needed and plugged Ken into the system.
The operation went smoothly; he'd been designed for
the purpose.
     Jill called up SimFlight on her CompMac and
tapped furiously, connecting it to Ken, then to the
actual plane. A moment later she spoke with that
triumphant tone of voice that rarely let us down:
"Got it! We have control!"
     The gunshots suggested the Clydes were getting
closer, and more heavy bodies were beginning to
throw themselves against the cockpit door. I was
about to make a suggestion when Albert beat me to it.
He was down but not out.
     "Godspeed," whispered Albert, still covering his
eyes. "Now, why don't you purge all the air from the
cabin, daughter?"
     Raising my eyebrows, I silently mouthed "daugh-
ter" to Arlene, but she shook her head. Albert obvi-
ously meant it generically. He was much too young to
be her real father.
     Faster and faster, Jill typed away . . . then the rag-
ing, surging sounds behind the door grew dimmer and
dimmer, finally fading away to nothing. Modern
death by keyboard. We were already at forty thousand
feet and climbing; up there, there was too little air to
sustain even zombies. And Clydes, human-real or
human-fake, had a human need for plenty of O2.
"Well done, daughter," said Albert. He could hear
just fine.
     Having come this close to buying it, I could hardly
believe we were safe again. A coughing fit came out of
nowhere and grabbed my heart. Arlene put her arm
around me and said, "Your turn to sleep again." I
didn't argue. I noticed that Albert was already
snoozing.
     Sleep that knits up the raveled sleave of care . , .
I felt too lousy, and too guilty somehow, to stay
under for long. Less than a half hour later I was awake
again. Jill had turned around, crossed the coastline,
and was over the ocean. All was well with the world
... for a few seconds longer.
     "Holy hell, we're losing airspeed!" she suddenly
screamed, jerking us all awake. "We're losing alti-
tude!"
     It's always something.
The engines strained and whined, making the
     noises they would if headed into a ferocious head
wind. But there was no wind. With a big fooooomp,
one engine flamed out. Jill wasn't kidding about the
quality of her simulator exercises; she instantly dived
the plane to restart it. Then she headed back, circling
around to try again.
     "Stupid monster mechanics," I yelled. "Dumb-ass
demon dildo ground crew! How the hell do these
idiots intend to conquer the world when they can't
even--"
     "Shut up!" Jill shouted. I shut up. She was right. I
could be pissed off all I wanted after she saved our
collective ass.
     Two more tries and she was white-faced. "It's some
kind of field," she said. "We can't go west."
"So that's how they're conquering the world," said
Arlene calmly. I took my medicine like a good boy.
33
     Jill set the auto-pilot to continue circling,
hoping no one had noticed the deviation yet. She
typed away, accessing the biotech nav-com aboard.
Then she smiled grimly. "Listen up," she said.
We sure as hell did; the mantle of command was
hers while we were in the air. "Guys, we're going to
have to dump you off at Burbank." She said it like
Dante's Ninth Circle of Hell where the devil himself
is imprisoned in ice, spending eternity chewing on
Judas like a piece of tough caramel. I'd made good
grades in my lit. courses.
     "What? Why?" demanded Arlene.
"The force-field switch is located in the old Disney
tower, near the studio."
     "Is nothing sacred to these devils?" I asked.
"Night on Bald Mountain," said Arlene, "part
deux."
     "Sorry. No choice."
Jill altered course and headed northeast. We didn't
speak for the rest of the short flight. None of us could
think of anything worth saying.
     Finally, Jill was bringing the plane low over Bur-
bank International Airport. "Can you do a rolling
stop?" I asked. "Slow down to about fifty kilometers
per hour, then turn it into a touch-and-go?"
"Uh," she said. After thinking about it, she contin-
ued: "Yeah. Why?" I let the silence speak for me. She
gasped and said, "You're crazy if you're thinking of a
roll-out!"
     "I'm thinking of a roll-out."
"What the hell," said Arlene. "I'm crazy too."
Jill shook her head, obviously wondering about
both of us.
     She cruised in over the airport, ignoring the stan-
dard landing pattern and dodging other planes, which
answered my question about lousy zombie pilots.
We were low enough that the passenger cabin was
pressurized again. Arlene and I went aft, picking our
way over a planeful of zombies and two Clydes that
were examples of the only good monsters. Jill kept
calling out, "Are you ready?" She sounded more
nervous each time. We reassured her. It was easier
than reassuring ourselves.
     "Open the rear cargo door!" Arlene shouted so that
Jill could hear. We hit the runway deck hard, bounc-
ing twice; the C-5 wasn't supposed to fly this slow.
The rushing wind made everything a lot noisier. But
we were able to hear Jill, loud and clear, when she said
the magic word:
     "Jump!"
We did just that, hitting the tarmac hard. I rolled
over and over and over, bruising portions of my
anatomy I'd never noticed before. I heard the sound
effects from Arlene doing her impression of a tennis
ball. But I didn't doubt this was the right way to
disembark the plane; couldn't risk a real landing.
I got to my feet first. Jill was having trouble with her
altitude. "Jesus, no!" shouted Arlene at the sight of
Jill headed for a row of high rises.
     "Lift, dammit, lift!" I spoke angrily into the air.
There wasn't time for a proper prayer.
     At the last second, bright, blinding flares erupted
from under both wings, and the C-5 pulled sharply
upward. A few seconds later we heard a roar so loud
that it almost deafened us.
     "What the hell?" Arlene asked, mouth hanging
open.
     "Outstanding!" I shouted, fisting the air. "She must
have found the switch for the JATO rockets."
"JATO?"
     "Jet-assisted takeoff!" I shouted. "They're rockets
on aircraft to allow them to do ultra-short-field take-
offs."
     "I didn't know that plane would have those."
"She probably didn't either," I said, so proud of her
I wished she could hear me call her daughter the same
way Albert had.
     We watched until Jill became a dark speck in the
sky, circling until we could get the field down.
We tucked and ran, jogging all the way to the huge
Disney building; the Disney logo at the top was shot
up--somebody'd been using it for target practice.
"Ready?" I asked.
     "Always."
I took a deep breath; pistols drawn, we popped the
door and slid inside.
     My God, what a wave of nostalgia! It was like old
times again . . . back on Phobos, sliding around cor-
ners, hunting those zombies!
     Up the stairwells--couldn't trust the lifts . . , I
mean the elevators. Any minute, I knew I'd run into a
hell-prince--and me without my trusty rocket
launcher. Thank God, I didn't.
     We played all our old games: cross fire, ooze-barrel-
blow, even rile-the-critters. The last was the most fun:
you get zombies and spinys so pissed, they munch
each other alive.
     Every floor we visited, we looked for that damned
equipment. Nada. We climbed higher and higher; I
began to get the strong feeling that we'd find the field
generator way, way up, fortieth floor, all the way at
the top.
     It'd be just our luck.
We took Sig-Cows off'n the first two zombies we
killed; better than the pistols, even though they were
still just 10mm. The next one had a beautiful, won-
derful shotgun. I'd take it, even if it was a fascist
pump-action.
     "Like old times," I said.
"Back on Deimos," she agreed.
     "They die just as easily. I like my new toy."
"Hold your horses, Fly Taggart," she said. "Haven't
you forgotten something?"
     "Like what?"
"A certain wager."
     No sooner did she mention the bet than I did
indeed remember. There was only one thing to do.
Change the subject: "Those zombies were probably
the least of our troubles, Arlene. We can settle this
later--"
     "No way, Fly! I jumped out of a plane for you, and
you're gonna pay your damn bet." When she got like
this there was nothing to do but surrender. All the
demonic forces of hell were like child's play compared
to welshing on a bet with Arlene Sanders.
     "Well, now that you mention it, I do have a vague
recollection," I lied. "And that Sig-Cow looks like a
mighty fine weapon at that."
     "Good," she said. "You take the Sig-Cow. The
shotgun is mine."
     We resolved this dispute at just about the right
moment, because a fireball exploded over our heads.
We were under bombardment by imps. Now the new
weapons would receive a literal baptism of fire.
Blowing away the spiny bastards, up the fifth floor
stairwell, I turned a corner and found myself nose-to-
nose with another Clyde. This close, there was no
question: it looked exactly the same as the one we'd
killed in the alley in Riverside, the same as the two
who'd disarmed us getting on the plane.
     There was no question now: they were, indeed,
genetically engineered. The aliens had finally made
their breakthrough . . . God help the human race.
He raised his .30 caliber, belt-fed, etc., etc.; but we
had the drop on him. He never knew what hit him--
well, it was a hail of bullets and Arlene's buckshot,
and he probably knew that; you know what I mean!
But now I had my own weapon; she looked envious
. . . but she'd had her pick. The bet was paid.
As a final treat, thirty-seven floors up--Jesus, was I
getting winded! I felt like an old man--we were
attacked by a big, floating, familiar old pumpkin.
It hissed. It made faces. It spat ball lightning at us.
I spat a stream of .30 caliber machine-gun bullets
back at it, popping it like a beach ball. It spewed all
over the room, spraying that blue ichor it uses for
blood.
     "Jesus, Fly," said my partner in crime, "I'm going
to lose my hearing if this keeps up."
     "What?"
"That machine gun! It's almost as loud as Jill and
her jets."
     "What's that?" I asked, grinning. I was delighted
with the results of my belt-fed baby.
     She gave a "playful" punch on the arm, my old
buddy. I yelped in pain.
     "Where's an uninjured place on your body?" she
asked.
     "That's a very good question. I think tumbling
down the airstrip eliminated all of those."
     "Same here," she said. "But you can still make a
great pumpkin pie." She kicked at the disgusting
remains on the ground.
     "Shall we find the top of the mouse house?" I
suggested.
     "After you, Fly."
In battlefield conditions, a proper gentleman goes
ahead of the lady. If she asks, anyway. I was happy to
oblige; but the nose of my machine gun actually
preceded both of us.
     At the very top we found a prize.
The door wasn't even locked. Inside was a room full
of computers hooked into a new collection of alien
biotech. This stuff gave off a stench, and some of it
made mewling sounds like an injured animal. I
wished Jill could be with us, plotting new ways of
becoming a technovivisectionist.
     "Got to be it," said Arlene.
I had trouble making out her words, not because my
hearing was impaired, but because of the noise level.
My machine gun contributed a good portion of it. So
did Arlene's shotgun. And there were several explo-
sions. A nice fanfare as we blew away unsuspecting
imps and zombies tending the equipment.
     I picked up a fiberglass baton off the body of an ex-
zombie guard and used it to bar the door. I expected
more playmates along momentarily. The idea didn't
even bother me; not so long as I could buy us some
time.
     Arlene waved the smoke away and began fiddling
with the controls on the main console. She frantically
started flipping one push-switch after another, look-
ing for the one that would kill the field.
     "There has to be a way of doing this," she said, "or
finding out if we've already done it.
     "What makes you so sure?"
"Well, what if the aliens wanted to fly to Hawaii?"
I nodded. "I can just see a pinkie in one of those
Hawaiian shirts."
     "Damn! I wish we had Jill and Ken with us."
"Defeats the whole purpose, A.S. They're ready
and waiting, forty thousand up, ready to blow for the
islands as soon as we cut the bloody field."
"Most of the switches require a psi-connection to
activate, and I can't do that!"
     By now there was a huge contingent pounding on
the door. The fiberglass bar was holding them ... so
far. These sounds did not improve Arlene's psycho-
logical state or aid the difficult work she was trying to
do.
     "I'm not getting it," she said. "I'm close, but I'm
not getting it. Damn, damn, damn . . ."
     "Is there anything I can do?"
"Hold the door. Hold the door! I'm sure there's one
special button, but how will I know it even if I find
it?"
     As if to mock her, the entire panel went dark right
then. She looked up and saw . . .
     Me. Me, her buddy. Fly Taggart, technical dork,
first-class. In my hand I held a gigantic electrical cord
that I'd sliced in half with my commando knife. I
knew that knife would come in handy one day.
"When in doubt, yank it out," I said with a smile.
She tried to laugh but was too tired for any sound to
come out. "Did you learn that in VD class?" she
asked.
     I was saved from answering her because the door
started to give way under the onslaught. Then the
shred of a feeble plan crept into my brain. I ran across
to the windows and smashed them open.
     We were forty stories high, looking straight down
on concrete, but it seemed better to open the windows
than leave them closed.
     "We took the energy wall down, at least," I said
over my shoulder. "Jill's got to notice it's gone and
tread air for Hawaii."
     Arlene nodded, bleak even in victory. She was
thinking of Albert ... I didn't need alien psionics to
know that. "The War Techies will track her as an
'unknown rider,'" added Arlene bleakly, "and they'll
scramble some jets; they should be able to make
contact and talk her down."
     "Would you say the debt is paid?"
I didn't have to specify which debt. Arlene consid-
ered for a long time. "Yeah," she said at last, "it's
paid."
     "Evens?"
"Evens."
     "Great. Got a hot plan to talk us down?" I asked
my buddy.
     She shook her head. I had a crazy wish that before
Albert was blinded, and before Arlene and I found
ourselves in this cul-de-sac, I'd played Dutch uncle to
the two love birds, complete with blessings and un-
wanted advice.
     But somehow this did not seem the ideal moment
to suggest that Arlene seriously study the Mormon
faith, if she really loved good old Albert. A sermon on
why it was better to have some religion, any religion,
lay dormant in my mind.
     Also crossing my mind was another sermon, on the
limitations of the atheist viewpoint, right before your
mortal body is ripped to shreds. Bad taste, especially
if you delivered it to someone with only precious
seconds left to come up with a hot plan.
     She shook her head. "There's no way," she began,
and then paused. "Unless . . ."
     "Yes?" I asked, trying not to let the sound of a
hundred slavering monsters outside the door add
panic to the atmosphere.
     Arlene stared at the door, at the console, then out
the window. She went over to the window like she had
all the time in the world and looked straight down.
Then up. For some reason, she looked up.
     She faced me again, wearing a big, crafty, Arlene
Sanders smile. "You are not going to believe this, Fly
Taggart, but I think--I think I have it. I know how to
get us down and get us to Hawaii to join Albert."
"And Jill," I added. I nodded back, convinced
she'd finally cracked. "Great idea, Arlene. We could
use a vacation from all this pressure."
     "You don't believe me."
"You're right. I don't believe you."
     Arlene smiled slyly. She was using the early-worm-
that-got-the-bird smile. "Flynn Taggart. .. bring me
some duct tape from the toolbox, an armload of
computer-switch wiring, and the biggest, goddamned
boot you can find!"