Operation Overlord: The Planning & Preparation That Led up to D-Day
D-Day: the most well-known military engagement in history. This invasion would begin the Western Front of World War II and lead to the liberation of France.

Sep 4, 2022 • By Turner Collins, BA History
Operation Overlord preparation d day
 

Of all the great military battles throughout human history, it is hardly a stretch to say that one of the most famous of these is Operation Overlord, more commonly known as D-day. On June 6th, 1944, the western Allied forces launched the largest amphibious invasion in history: over 350,000 naval, airforce, and army personnel from twelve countries deployed to France’s northern coast to establish a new front line against the Germans. This was a herculean effort that required untold amounts of planning, preparation, and coordination, all of which helped drastically shift the focus of the Nazis away from the war with the Soviet Union in the east and forced them to split their attention to multiple fronts. Regardless of doubts about the war there might have been before the summer of 1944, D-day marked a clear and distinct shift in public opinion of the war, proving that victory was undoubtedly and assuredly within reach for the first time in years.



 

Operation Overlord: Preparation For the D-Day Landings
french tanks battle of france ww2
French tanks during the Battle of France, via Britannica
 

By the summer of 1944, World War II had been raging across the globe for five years. War had come to Western Europe in the Summer of 1940 when, after the invasion of Poland, the German forces turned their sights on France and Britain. Both had turned down offers of peace from Hitler, who wished to focus his attention on his main enemy, the Soviet Union, and believed that the western Allies had no stomach for war. Through a rapid invasion known as the Battle of France, the Germans completely ejected the Allies from the continent, subjugating France under a collaborationist government and forcing the remnants of the French and British militaries to flee to England. With this, the war in Western Europe had ended on land. However, attempts by Germany to break the resolve of the British would continue through to the Battle of Britain, where Royal Air Force pilots engaged with the members of the Luftwaffe in the skies over England.

 

germans fighting operation barbarossa
German soldiers fighting on the Eastern Front, via Russia Beyond
 

During this time, the war raged in the east as millions of Russian and German soldiers clashed across a massive front. Desperate for any help they could get, the Soviets constantly demanded that the Western allies, at first consisting only of the British Empire and its few remaining allies, but later including America, open another front. Despite the war being waged in North Africa and later Italy, the Soviets insisted that this was not enough and that another front was required. Finally, in late 1943, the British and Americans agreed that the Western Allies would open a second major front in France to split and encircle Germany’s forces. It was at this point that Operation Overlord was conceived: with one of the most massive mobilizations and concentrations of manpower to be sent in an amphibious landing.

 

The Details of D-Day
dieppe raid ww2 canadians
Casualties of the failed Dieppe raid, via The National WW2 Museum, New Orleans
 

Get the latest articles delivered to your inbox
Sign up to our Free Weekly Newsletter
Email Address
Join!
Even though the actual operation had only been planned in the closing months of 1943, a major amphibious invasion of Europe had been in the works for some time. As far back as 1942, the Allies had been working with naval landings in Africa and elsewhere.

 

One of the major stepping stones in the tactical evolution was known as the Dieppe Raid, an attempt by Commonwealth forces, namely Canadians, in August of 1942 to temporarily seize the port city of Dieppe in northern France. Despite outnumbering the German defenders by a great deal, the Allies’ inexperience in landing operations became evident, and the entire operation resulted in a costly defeat. Over half of the landing force was either killed, wounded, or captured, and virtually none of the objectives had been claimed.

 

Although the landing ended in failure, a great amount of operational information had been gained, essentially providing a “what not to do” playbook for all future landings. One of the more important lessons was that attacks on heavily-defended port cities were unfeasible at best. This would ultimately decide the final location of the D-day landings and result in the Allies constructing massive, hastily-built temporary ports in the wake of the landings.

 

allied landing italy ww2
Allied troops landing in Sicily, via The Atlantic
 

By the summer of 1944, the Allies were well experienced with naval landings across North Africa, Italy, and the Pacific, which could all be applied to Operation Overlord. Most importantly, a significant amount of preparation and intelligence work went into the landings. It was almost impossible to hide the massing of troops across England from the Germans. However, ever the masters of deception warfare, the British were able to mislead the Germans as to where precisely the invasion would take place. Countless possible locations for the landing were leaked and prepared across Europe in a broad string of deception operations known collectively as Operation Bodyguard. In addition, leading up to the invasion itself, several radar installations along the French coast were destroyed, further blinding the German defenders to the exact nature of the upcoming assault.

 

German Preparations
atlantic wall german sentry ww2
A German sentry on the Atlantic Wall, via European Heritage
 

The Germans were not idle either. As early as 1942, Hitler had become acutely aware of the possibility of naval incursions into Europe after several raids along the coast, including Dieppe. As a result, a massive chain of fortifications and garrisons were established, intending to create a mighty Atlantic Wall from the border of Spain all the way to the northern tip of Norway. Millions of mines were placed, and tens of thousands of bunkers were built and garrisoned by hundreds of thousands of soldiers, with even more conscripted civilians being used as forced laborers.

 

Initially, the creation had been slow and sporadic, but the appointment of the fabled General Field Marshal Erwin Rommel, “The Desert Fox” of the African campaigns, would change the dynamic of command. There was a good deal of disagreement within the German high command on how best to respond to an invasion of mainland Europe, and Hitler, who had been at odds with the more experienced Rommel, had seen fit to keep him mainly as a figurehead, rather than giving him an actual command in France or elsewhere.

 

rommel inspecting atlantic wall operation overlord
Field Marshal Erwin Rommel inspecting fortifications on the wall, via WW2 Photo Archive
 

Even the well-regarded Field Marshal known for his cunning found himself duped by the Allies. Rommel, along with much of the rest of the German Command, firmly believed that the landings would occur at Calais. Despite this, a huge amount of effort and organization was put into securing the fortifications along the Atlantic Wall, even as more troops and valuable war material were shifted to the Eastern Front, where the war with the Soviets was reaching an ever more desperate and bloody struggle.

 

Because of this, many sections of the wall were left understaffed by what would be considered “second-rate” troops, comprised of older individuals, enlisted POWs, and ex-pats from the East. This was compounded by the command structure, which left command of the critically important and valuable German panzer-divisions split between three individuals: Rommel, Leo Geyr von Schweppenburg, and Hitler himself.

 

Rommel believed that an invasion must be fought off close to the beaches to mitigate the Allied air superiority he had witnessed in North Africa. In contrast, Geyr von Schweppenburg and other members of the German high command believed that allowing the Allies to land and advance deeper into France and thus out of the range of their naval support would allow for better results with their tank divisions. This lack of coordination and Hitler’s insistence on involving himself would ultimately decide the German response on June 6th, 1944.

 

June 6th, 1944: D-Day
omaha beach landing dday overlord
One of the most famous wartime pictures of the Omaha beach landing, via Dkfindout
 

While the term “D-day” in the military simply refers to the day on which an operation or attack is to take place, it would become synonymous with the Normandy landings on the morning of the 6th of June, 1944 and is often remembered even now as “The day of days.”

 

It was originally believed that weather conditions would stall the invasion for some weeks. Even some of the German high command, including Rommel himself, would initially be away from northern France, thinking that the weather would not be calm enough for a landing. Despite this, Allied meteorologists were able to better predict the weather due to complete control over the Atlantic and expected that conditions would be acceptable for the 6th of June.

 

The first wave over the English Channel would, in fact, not be from the sea but the air, as tens of thousands of paratroopers were deployed throughout the Norman countryside in order to secure critical infrastructure and points ahead of the invasion itself. By dawn, almost 7,000 vessels had made the journey from England and spread out to land some 150,000 soldiers across the coastline of Normandy.

 

british landing operation overlord
British soldiers landing on the beaches of Normandy, via Imperial War Museums
 

The major landings were concentrated on five beachheads. Utah and Omaha, the two western-most beaches, were to be stormed by the Americans. Further east was Gold and Juno, assigned to the British and Canadians, respectively. Finally, the eastern-most beach was Sword, assaulted by combined British and free French forces.

 

Many lessons had been learned from the failure at Dieppe, and excessive preparation had been taken to avoid a repeat. One of the developments was a specialist type of amphibious tank, known as a DD (Duplex Drive) tank, which could propel itself through the water using a waterproof skirt and propellers connected to the main drive. While innovative, these tanks were difficult to operate and not terribly buoyant. This was worsened by the fact that the height of the waves on D-day in some parts of the landings was about six times that for which the DD tanks had previously been tested.

 

sherman dd tank ww2
An Allied Sherman DD tank similar to those used on D-day, via World War Photos
 

Despite the obstacles, the Allied forces and their new amphibious armor were able to reach the beaches, with the exception of Omaha, where not a single tank was able to make the crossing. Even as the invasion came fully underway, the German high command could not believe this was anything more than a diversion for the real invasion at Pas-de-Calais.

 

Worse still for the German defenders was the fact that four out of their ten reserve tank regiments required Hitler’s personal permission to deploy, and when the landings occurred at roughly 6 am, Hitler was still asleep. The fear of angering Hitler, as is often the case in despotic hierarchies, meant that he was left to rise on his own, some four hours after the initial invasion, before being made aware of what was happening, meaning that some of his most key reserves were unable to act.

 

Despite the success of the landings across all the beaches, the Allies found their progress significantly slowed, with none of the desired day-one objectives achieved in the face of fierce resistance and bad weather. At this point, the second phase of the Battle of Normandy began as Allied troops attempted to press inwards toward Caen and break out of the beachhead they had created.

Operation Bagration: Russia’s D-Day against the Germans
Operation Bagration was the biggest Allied offensive of World War II, and it crushed the German defenses in the east, paving the way for total victory.

Feb 3, 2023 • By Greg Beyer, BA History and Linguistics, Diploma in Journalism
operation bagration russia against the germans d day
Soviet troops advance against German positions, via warfarehistorynetwork.com
 

June 1944 was a devastating month for the Third Reich. Fortress Europe had been breached on the Coast of Normandy by the British, Canadians, and Americans, and Allied troops were pouring into Europe, sweeping aside a desperate, outnumbered, and outgunned German defense. The Western Allies also continued their push up the boot of Italy, tying down German troops. On the Eastern Front, things were about to get even worse for the beleaguered Germans. Operation Bagration was about to begin. The Soviet answer to D-Day would be the biggest Allied offensive of the entire war, resulting in Germany’s biggest defeat in history.



 

The Beginning of Operation Bagration
operation bagration map
An operation map of Operation Bagration, via weaponsandwarfare.com
 

The German-Soviet front line was long, and the Germans knew that a massive Soviet offensive was going to happen, but they didn’t know where. In April 1944, the German High Command met to discuss the matter, and three conclusions were drawn.

 

An attack in the south, through Ukraine, would be ideal for tank battles. This would be the easiest option from a tactical perspective for the Soviets, but from a strategic perspective, as the offensive gained momentum, the natural lay of the land would draw the Soviets too far south of Germany, which was, after all, their main objective. An attack in the north into the Baltic states would be dangerous, as it would shorten the front significantly once the Baltics fell and allow the Germans to concentrate forces in the north to repel any Soviet offensive. An attack in the center would meet with significant resistance, but it would take the Soviets directly to Berlin.

 

The Soviet forces were split into four main groups along the front. The northern two groups were under Aleksandr Vasilevsky, while the southern two groups were under the command of Georgy Zhukov. Stalin decided that the attack would happen in the center, using Vasilevsky’s southernmost troops and Zhukov’s northernmost troops. After the initial success, the offensive would broaden to include the north and the south, encompassing the entire front line, which would be necessary to avoid Soviet forces creating a salient which could be encircled. When asked what the offensive operation was to be called, Stalin recalled the name of a fellow Georgian who had fought against Napoleon’s forces at the Battle of Borodino over a hundred years before. That man’s name was Pyotr Bagration.

 

The Attack Begins
operation bagration georgy zhukov
Marshal Georgy Zhukov, who would go on to take Berlin, via albumwar2.com
Get the latest articles delivered to your inbox
Sign up to our Free Weekly Newsletter
Email Address
Join!
 

On June 23, the Soviet summer offensive of Operation Bagration commenced. Attacks began in the South, deceiving the Germans into thinking the main thrust would come through Ukraine. When the main attack came through the Belorussian corridor instead, the Germans realized they had been deceived.

 

The Germans, meanwhile, were in an unenviable position. They were focusing on stalling the Allied advances in France and Italy. It was hoped that the “unnatural alliance” between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union would fall apart, and Germany hoped to be able to stall the Allied offensives long enough for this to happen. Things, however, would not go Germany’s way.

 

The Wehrmacht was still reeling from the previous year’s onslaught and by 1944, had lost over 3.5 million soldiers. Hitler also ordered that no other defensive lines were to be built, as retreat was forbidden. The Germans were expected to fight and die where they stood in defensive positions called Fester Platze (strongholds), which was great for the Soviets but not so great for any sane-minded German.

 

This was one of Hitler’s insane strategic decisions that made his generals’ eyes roll. German Ninth Army General Jordan remarked:

 

“Ninth Army stands on the eve of another great battle, unpredictable in extent and duration… the Army believes that, even under the present conditions, it would be possible to stop the enemy offensive, but not under the present directives which require an absolutely rigid defense.”
 

The inflexibility of being able to fall back to new defensive lines was absolutely disastrous for the Germans in an offensive that was far greater than the western Allies’ and was on a front where the attackers could maneuver with relative ease. Operation Bagration would rip asunder any notions of military superiority within the Axis forces.

 

Tactical Breakthrough
operation bagration katyusha
Katyusha rocket launchers attacking German positions, from Timophey Melnik/Sputnik, via Russia Beyond
 

The first phase of Operation Bagration focused like a trident on three major German positions of Army Group Centre. The Vitebsk-Orsha Offensive resulted in the towns of Vitebsk and Orsha being liberated while German armies were either pushed back or encircled. Orsha had been designated as a Fester Platz and was completely encircled after the 1st Baltic Front ripped a 25-mile (40-kilometer) hole in the German front line by June 24. This gap was exploited with Soviet mechanized units prepared for the eventuality per the Soviet “Deep Battle” strategy.

 

Either without orders to retreat from the Fester Platz or with orders that came too late, the German positions were completely surrounded and neutralized. By June 26, German divisions were in full retreat. After losing contact with his divisions, the German general in charge of the sector, Georg Pfeiffer, was killed in an air attack.

 

destroyed panzers bobruisk
Destroyed Panzer IVs near Bobruisk, via The National Interest
 

To the south at Mogilev, directly east of the Belorussian capital of Minsk, the German XII Corps and XXXIX Panzer Corps were under heavy attack. They suffered major casualties while the Army Group commander had to take valuable time getting permission from Hitler to withdraw. After attaining this permission, the German forces fell back but had to do so under cover of darkness, as the Soviet air force made it impossible to move during the day without being subject to severe air attacks. Unfortunately for the Germans, they retreated into a trap, where they were encircled and taken prisoner.

 

South of Mogilev, General Rokossovsky attacked the two fortress cities of Bobruisk and Slutsk. While the former put up stiff resistance, Soviet coordination and firepower smashed through the lines and carved through Slutsk, allowing the Soviets to enter Bobruysk, which fell on June 29 after bitter urban fighting.

 

So far, Operation Bagration had been a stunning success for the Soviets.

 

Minsk & Polotsk Liberated
medical officer wounded soldier
A medical officer tends to a wounded soldier, from Boris Yaroslavtsev / RIA Novosti, via arzamas.academy
 

The capture of the capital of the Belorussian SSR, Minsk, was the most important objective of Operation Bagration. From June 28, Soviet forces capitalized on their momentum and pushed forward, moving up towards Minsk from the south and the east, securing crossings on the Berezina River. Within days, the entirety of Minsk was surrounded, trapping the German 4th Army and the remnants of the 9th Army that escaped Bobruisk and Slutsk.

 

In the north of Belorussia, the Soviets pursued German forces to the town of Polotsk, where fighting continued until July 4. With the capture of Polotsk, Belorussia was now secure and protected from any attempt at a German counter-offensive from the German Army Group North.

 

From June 22 to July 4, the German Army Group Center lost 300,000 soldiers: killed, captured, wounded, or missing. It was the most comprehensive and stunningly fast defeat the Wehrmacht suffered during the entire war.

 

Offensive Operations Turn North & Push West
operation bagration 152mm howitzers
Soviet artillery pound German positions during Operation Bagration, via rarehistoricalphotos.com
 

After the successful capture of Belorussia, Operation Bagration continued against the German Army Group North. Attacks in Lithuania saw Siauliai and Vilnius liberated by the Soviets, who then repelled counter-attacks on each of the cities. The Lithuanian city of Kaunas was also liberated on August 1. In Poland, Bialystok was stormed and taken after just two days of fighting, which led to the Lublin-Brest and Osovets offensives which were the last pushes of Operation Bagration. The Germans were finally able to form a defensive line in mid-August on the Narew River between Bialystok and Warsaw – a position they held until the renewed Soviet offensive in January 1945.

 

The Aftermath of Operation Bagration
operation bagration 9th army
Abandoned vehicles of the German 9th Army, via Warrior Maven
 

Operation Bagration was a stunning victory for the Soviets and a crushing defeat for the Germans. Seventeen German divisions had been completely destroyed, and 50 divisions had lost more than half their complement. Nine German generals were killed, and 22 were captured. Belorussia was retaken, and vast portions of Poland and the Baltics were also captured, all in under two months. As they progressed, the Soviets found villages burnt and whole areas depopulated by the brutal German occupation. During Operation Bagration, 57,000 German prisoners were transported back to Moscow and marched through the streets. Precise casualty rates are difficult to determine, but an approximate figure stands at around or just under half a million casualties on the German side and over half a million on the Soviet side.


Battle of Mycale: The Last Battle of the Greco-Persian War
Immediately after the Battle of Plataea, the Greeks struck another devastating blow to the Persians at the Battle of Mycale during the Greco-Persian Wars.

Jul 9, 2023 • By Greg Beyer, BA History and Linguistics, Diploma in Journalism
battle of mycale
 

The Second Greco-Persian War was a major contest between the might of Persia and the disparate Greek city-states which had come together to fight a common foe. The Persian invasion was effectively crushed after the Greeks won a major victory at Plataea on the Greek mainland. However, it didn’t take long for the Greeks to go on the offensive. Almost immediately (by some accounts on the same day), the Greeks launched their own attack on Persian soil to cripple any possible Persian ability for a renewed offensive.



 

Overshadowed by the Battles of Thermopylae, Salamis, and Plataea, the Battle of Mycale deserves its own special place in the list of heroic victories against the Achaemenid Empire of Xerxes.

 

Background to the Battle of Mycale
berlin painter greek persian painting
Two sides of an amphora displaying a Greek chasing a Persian, attributed to the Berlin Painter, 500-480 BCE, via Getty Museum
 

In 482 BCE, King Xerxes I of Persia (Achaemenid Dynasty) invaded Greece. With possibly the biggest army ever assembled in the ancient world, the Persians laid waste to many parts of northern Greece.

 

The Greeks, severely outnumbered, attempted to stall the Persians at Thermopylae and Artemisium. At Thermopylae, a tiny force of a few thousand Greeks, led by King Leonidas of Sparta and his 300 Spartans, held the pass of Thermopylae for two days before succumbing to the Persians on the third day. Meanwhile, off the coast, the naval battle of Artemisium was taking place to protect the Greek flank. 271 Greek triremes engaged a force of over 1 200 Persian ships. Despite being heavily outnumbered, the Greeks sank hundreds of enemy vessels, but it wasn’t without significant loss. The Greeks lost a hundred vessels of their own.

 

Get the latest articles delivered to your inbox
Sign up to our Free Weekly Newsletter
Email Address
Join!
Overwhelmed, and with the Battle of Thermopylae over, there was no point in the Greeks staying. So, they sailed to the straits of Salamis, where they prepared to draw the Persian fleet into a narrow strip of water off the western coast of Athens.

 

david leonidas thermopylae painting
Leonidas at Thermopylae, by Jacques Luis David, 1814, via Louvre
 

Again, heavily outnumbered, the result was a decisive victory for the Greeks under the leadership of Themistocles, who commanded the fleet. The Persian losses at Artemisium and Salamis were a huge blow to the Persians, who would no longer be able to support their massive land army from the sea. Fearing that the Greeks would destroy the pontoon bridge across the Hellespont and trap the Persian army in Greece, the Persians decided to retreat back to Asia Minor with the majority of the army. Still, they left a major force under the command of Mardonius, who was tasked with completing the conquest of Greece.

 

The Greek fleet was ascendant, but the Persian fleet was still a major threat that, under the right leadership, could turn the tide back in their own favor.

 

The Greek navy then sailed eastwards to the island of Delos, halfway between the Greek mainland and Asia Minor. Here, the Greek navy, now under the command of the Spartan king, Leotychides, linked up with the Athenian navy under the command of Xanthippus, who had succeeded Themistocles. They were approached by a delegation from the island of Samos directly east, off the coast of Ionia.

 

The delegation suggested that if the Greeks pursued and attacked the Persian navy near Ionia, the Greek city-states under the Persian Empire’s yoke would rise up in rebellion.

 

The Greek Fleet Sets Sail
greek trireme olympias
‘Olympias’; a reconstruction of a Greek trireme, 1987, via Hellenic Navy
 

There is little documentation of the Battle of Mycale. What we know today comes mainly from the writings of the Greek historian Herodotus and, to a lesser extent, the Sicilian Greek historian Diodorus Siculus.

 

The Greek movements were not unknown to the Persians. When they heard the Greek navy was on the way to Ionia across the Aegean Sea, the Persian fleet sailed from Samos to the foot of mount Mycale on the coast of Ionia. A Persian army of 60 000 men under the command of Tigranes was camped there. When the Persian fleet arrived, they beached the ships and built a palisade around them.

 

Upon arrival at Samos in August 479 BCE, the Greeks discovered the Persian fleet had left, and they were unsure of what course of action to take. Eventually, they decided to set sail for the mainland, where they discovered the position taken up by the Persians. Leotychides sailed as close to the coast as possible, whereupon, according to Herodotus, the Greeks appealed to the Ionians to either take up arms against the Persians or at least not to join the fight against the Greeks. Herodotus also suggests the appeal may have been a ruse to make the Persians distrust their Ionian allies.

 

The Two Sides Prepare to Battle
battle mycale herodotus
A bust of the Greek historian Herodotus from whom we know most about the Battle of Mycale, via the Center for Hellenic Studies at Harvard
 

The Greek allies beached their ships and began to disembark an army of marines. Mistrustful of the Ionians in their ranks, the Persians took measures to protect themselves from betrayal. The Samians (from Samos) were disarmed, while the Milesians (from Miletus) were sent to guard the passes over the mountain. Thus the Persians removed two of the immediate dangers. Nevertheless, with a massive army of 60 000 men and in a good defensive position, the Persians were understandably confident.

 

It is suggested that the Greeks at Mycale had been informed of the victory at the Battle of Plataea earlier in the month, and morale was boosted even further. For the Persians, the defeat at Salamis and their retreat from the Greek mainland would have led to them being dispirited. Nevertheless, they left camp and prepared to do battle.

 

The Two Forces Engage
phalanx against persians
Phalanx in battle against the Persians, by Heinrich Leutemann,1865, via New York Public Library
 

The Greeks deployed in two wings. The right flank of the right wing was buttressed by the coast, and consisted of Athenians, Corinthians, Sicyonians, and Troezenians. The left flank of the left-wing pointed towards the slopes of Mount Mycale and consisted of Spartans.

 

The Persians formed up directly in front of their camp and directly ahead of the Athenian-led wing, leaving their right flank exposed. The Spartans thus attempted to outflank the Persians over the rocky ground at the base of Mount Mycale. The Athenians, according to Herodotus, engaged the Persians with intense ferocity as they wanted to achieve victory without requiring the Spartan contingent.

 

columns mycale mountain
Mount Mycale in present-day Turkey, photo by Sheldon Johnson via Duke Divinity School
 

The Persians held firm for a short while before succumbing to the pressure from the Athenian wing and falling back to the safety of the camp. The Athenian wing pursued and re-engaged the flagging Persians, many of whom started fleeing the camp. Herodotus recounts that the ethnic Persians put up the most resistance while the other elements of the army fled.

 

Eventually, having traversed the broken, rocky ground between Mount Mycale and the Persian camp, the Spartans arrived. Completing the flanking maneuver, they entered the camp and attacked the rear of the remaining Persians. It didn’t take long for the Persians to break. With no cohesion left, the entire Persian army was routed.

 

Herodotus claims that the Samians joined the fight on the side of the Greeks, but without arms, it is likely they weren’t deployed near the main combat. The Milesians guarding the passes over Mount Mycale also turned on the Persians, either killing the fleeing Persians or redirecting them back toward the Greeks.

 

painting battle mycale
The Greeks storm the Persian camp at Mycale, via History Force
 

Herodotus does not go into detail about how many casualties each side took but states that the losses were heavy on both sides. The Persians suffered a loss in leadership with the death of their admiral, Mardontes, as well as the general, Tigranes. The Greeks also lost their general, Perilaus. Both Herodotus and Diodorus note that the surviving Persians escaped toward Sardis. Leotychides and Xanthippus both survived the battle.

 

Battle of Mycale: Conclusion
reconstruction immortals
Reconstruction of Persian soldiers, image by Ardashir Radpour & Holly Martin Photography, via kavehfarrokh.com
 

After the battle, the Spartans sailed home, while the Athenians stayed on to recapture Greek possessions, notably the Chersonese (now known as Gallipoli). They laid siege to the city of Sestos, which they eventually captured.

 

With the devastating losses at Plataea and Mycale, the Persian ability to invade Greece had been crippled. However, they still posed a threat to the Ionian cities that would rise in a second rebellion against their Persian overlords.

 

hoplite-reconstruction-arrowheads-greek-battle-of-salamis
Reconstruction of a Greek hoplite’s armor, via the National Archaeological Museum
 

The significance of the Battle of Mycale cannot be overstated. While Salamis gained fame for saving Greece from immediate conquest, it was the battles of Plataea and Mycale which effectively ended the threat. The Battle of Plataea dealt a major blow to any hopes of conquering Greece with the forces that were already there, and the Battle of Mycale was the final nail in the coffin of the Second Persian Invasion of Greece.


 

The Greeks, however, kept their guard up, knowing that the Persian Empire was vast and could launch another attempt. Despite the ability to raise more armies, the Persians had lost the will to deal with the Greeks. They would focus on other things.

 

The Greeks, too, would focus on other things. The growing tension between Athens and Sparta would lead to the Peloponnesian War. The age where virtually the whole of Greece was united against a common enemy was over.
 

operation bagration warsaw uprising
Young fighters of the Warsaw Uprising, via Instytut Polski
 

Operation Bagration dealt a fatal blow to the Germans. It forced the German High Command to commit divisions on the Western Front to the Eastern Front, allowing the Western Allies to push further east. Despite the attempt at reinforcing the east, the Germans had lost so much material and manpower that the Soviets now had a springboard into the German heartland that would be almost impossible to defend effectively.

 

In addition to Operation Bagration being a massive Soviet victory, it triggered the Warsaw Uprising, which, although it failed, signified the loss of control in German-held areas, eventually leading to a complete collapse in the face of the Soviet onslaught.


Twenty years ago last month 111 B-29s of Brig. Gen. Emmett “Rosy” O’Donnell’s 73d Bomb Wing left Isely Field, on Saipan, and set course for Tokyo, some 1,500 miles away. This mission, code-named San Antonio 1, was the first B-29 attack against Japan from the recently captured Marianas and the first attack upon Tokyo since Jimmy Doolittle’s carrier-based raid of April 18, 1942.

Weather was bad to and over the target, and only eighty-eight B-29s were able to drop their bombs at all. Of these, only twenty-four bombed the primary target, but the appearance of the Superfortresses over their capital on November 24, 1944, brought home to the Japanese people the stark reality of the situation. American air-power was now within reach of the home islands. Worse, the Japanese Air Force couldn’t do a thing about it.

Within nine months this aerial armada grew from a single bomb wing with 119 aircraft to five wings and a thousand B-29s. The course of the Pacific war was soon to change abruptly as the weight of American airpower was felt.

The B-29 forces which operated from the Marianas were a part of the Twentieth Air Force, activated in Wash­ington on April 4, 1944, with Gen. H. H. Arnold, Chief of the Army Air Forces, as Commander. The Twentieth operated directly under the Joint Chiefs of Staff and was unique in that the headquarters resided in Washington while the combat element was in the Marianas, more than 8,000 miles away.

Since Guadalcanal in 1942, United States forces had been engaging Japanese forces in battle, but, until the arrival in the Marianas of the XXI Bomber Command, the homeland, the sustainer of the war effort, had been un­touched, save for the Doolittle raid and a comparatively minor effort by the XX Bomber Command from China. The tentacles of Japanese expansion were being crushed, but the heart was untouched until the XXI Bomber Com­mand—the combat arm of the Twentieth Air Force—began a systematic and cataclysmic series of attacks, short in duration but terrible in their intensity.

The defeat of the Japanese Empire is unique in modem military history. For the first time, a major nation sur­rendered, totally and unconditionally, without a single invader having set foot within its borders. Germany sur­rendered in 1918 before actual invasion, but invading troops in large numbers had penetrated the homeland during the course of the war. Japan accepted defeat while possessing more than two and one-half million combat-equipped troops and 9,000 kamikaze planes in the home islands.

United States strategy contemplated an invasion of the home islands, with landings on the southern island of Kyushu scheduled for November 1945. Honshu was to be invaded the following March, even though many Amer­ican commanders, mostly air officers, stated as early as May 1945 that air attacks would make an invasion un­necessary.

Evidence supports the conclusion that the B-29 offensive, more than any other factor, forced the issue. By August 1945, the XXI Bomber Command had destroyed a high percentage of Japanese industry, wrecked her economy, and shattered the morale of her people. In 1945, the XXI Bomber Command comprised the sole force capable of a sustained and continuous attack upon the Japanese homeland.

The XXI Bomber Command was activated at Smoky Hill Army Air Field, Kan., on March 8, 1944. Soon afterward, the Command Headquarters moved to Colorado Springs to bring together the headquarters of the Command, its three wing headquarters, and Second Air Force. The latter was supplying the cadre of personnel, fillers, and replace­ments.

By June the Bomber Command was comprised of three wings. The 73d Bomb Wing (VH) consisted of four Bomb Groups: the 497th, 498th, 499th, and 500th. In the 313th Wing were the 6th, 9th, 504th, and 505th Groups. The 314th Wing was made up of the 19th, 29th, 39th, and 330th Groups. Two additional wings joined the Command in the Marianas. The 58th—first wing to use the B-29 in combat from bases in India and China—arrived on Tinian in April 1945. In this wing were the 40th, 444th, 462d, and 468th Bomb Groups. The 315th Wing, the fifth to join the Command, flew its first combat mission on June 26, 1945. It consisted of the 16th, 331st, 501st, and 502d Groups.

The summer months of 1944 were arduous. Washington was pressing for combat readiness in a minimum of time. The B-29, however, was the largest and most complicated aircraft produced to that date, and there were problems. From October 1943 to September 1944, the in-commission rate never exceeded forty percent at any time. During July 1944, the Command in-commission rate for the B-29 was twenty-seven percent, and in August only thirty-six percent, while the average monthly hours flown per air­craft assigned in July was 2.8, and in August 3.6 hours.

By October 1944, XXI Bomber Command units were spread from Colorado Springs to the Marianas, though most of the combat aircraft still were in Kansas and Nebraska. The movement of thousands of men, hundreds of aircraft, and tons of materiel was an exacting, com­plicated, and difficult task. Total strength had now reached 43,000, with 8,000 in the headquarters and related units, and 11,500 men in each of the three wings.

The first B-29 to reach the Marianas was Joltin’ Josie, The Pacific Pioneer, which landed on Saipan October 12, 1944, with General Hansell at the controls. Brig. Gen. Haywood S. “Possum” Hansell, Jr., had assumed com­mand of the XXI on August 28. He had been Chief of Staff of the Twentieth Air Force in Washington and was given the task of leading the Bomber Command overseas and directing its initial missions against Japan. Soon to follow were elements of General O’Donnell’s 73d Wing, which would fly fourteen combat missions before the second wing entered the fray. Total B-29 hours per crew averaged only 108.

Six shakedown missions were flown by the 73d soon after its arrival at Isely Field, Saipan, against submarine pens on Truk and Iwo Jima. These missions furnished the crews needed experience in navigation, bombing, radar approach, formation flying at altitude, and night landings. The bombing results were unsatisfactory. The 73d needed more training, but General Arnold ordered the first strike against Japan itself.

A Period of Trial

From this first mission on November 24, 1944, until the revolutionary change in tactics on March 9, 1945, was a time of trial and error, of frustration and dejection. Main­tenance equipment and supplies were lacking. Flight per­sonnel and maintenance technicians were green. Informa­tion on Japanese targets was scanty. Bomb loads were often limited to three tons because of excessive fuel Con­sumption. Missions were flown every fourth to sixth day, depending on weather, and during December, January, and February missions were flown on only eighteen days. All of these factors meant an exceedingly high noneffective rate of aircraft airborne and a low rate of combat effort. For the three-month period, the monthly average was fifty-eight hours per aircraft and forty-four hours per crew.

The effectiveness of Bomber Command operations could be measured in two ways—first, by the bomb tonnage carried to Japan, and secondly, by how much of this tonnage hit primary targets. In both critical areas, the Command fell short of all expectations.

A target system issued in November listed the following priorities: (1) Japanese aircraft industry, (2) Japanese urban industrial areas, (3) Japanese shipping. Seven of the ten primary targets were aircraft and engine factories. Lower on the priority list were coke, steel, and oil. When weather or other conditions made it impossible to bomb any priority targets, the Command was directed to radar bomb specific port and urban areas.

Throughout this early period the Command adhered to the time-honored Air Force doctrine of high-altitude, daylight, precision bombing. Although successful in Eu­rope, this approach failed to achieve significant results after three months of continued operations against Japan. Much had been expected from the B-29, but not much was being obtained.

On January 6 General Arnold sent Brig. Gen. Lauris Norstad to Guam to inform Genera] Hansel that a change was coming. It came on January 20, when Maj. Gen. Curtis E. LeMay assumed command of the XXI. The thirty-eight-year-old general had earned a reputation as a hard taskmaster with the 3d Air Division in England. He came to his new post from XX Bomber Command. He went to the Marianas as a top combat commander. He emerged from the war as a brilliant air strategist.

General LeMay immediately ordered a rigid training program. For combat crews, this consisted of classroom instruction, supervised line maintenance, mission planning and briefing, physical training, dinghy drills, instrument training, and lead crew tactics. The mission critique was begun on February 5. Wing commanders and their staffs met with General LeMay and his staff following each strike to discuss problems, including possible changes to the approved tactical doctrine.

These training programs, together with increased experi­ence, showed significant results. In November 1944, only twenty percent of the airborne aircraft bombed the pri­mary target, and twenty percent failed to bomb any target. In March 1945, eighty-five percent bombed the primary target, and in July the percentage climbed to ninety-four percent.

From Fire Bombs to Atomic Bombs

The third phase began on March 9, 1945. From March to the termination of hostilities on August 14, the B-29 strength in the Marianas increased from less than 400 to 1,000. Command personnel on Guam reached 37,500, on Tinian 26,500, on Saipan 12,700, and on newly captured Iwo Jima 13,000.

This period was one of tremendous success. Those who had held to the belief, even in darker days, that the B-29 could force Japan to surrender before a land invasion were vindicated. The speed with which the Command was transformed from near impotence into an instrument of devastating power was alarming, both to the Japanese and to many within our military services.

A key factor was the change in tactics inaugurated by General LeMay and applied in the great incendiary attacks upon Japanese cities, which began in force on March 9, 1945. Although LeMay consulted with his top com­manders, he alone was responsible for the final decision to adopt this drastic change to unproven combat tactics. From high-altitude, daylight, precision bombing in forma­tion, the switch was made to low-level, area bombing during hours of darkness.

Eight principal factors influenced the decision: (1) pre­vious bombing tactics had produced unfavorable results; (2) winds and cloud coverage prevented satisfactory visual bombing from high altitudes; (3) by March 1945, Japa­nese fighter interception had decreased substantially; (4) by March, the strength of the Command had increased to three combat wings; (5) it was believed that enemy resist­ance would be lessened by night attacks; (6) a change to low altitude would greatly extend the life of the engines, which averaged only 264 hours between overhauls; (7) much less fuel would be consumed, thus permitting greater bomb loads; and (8) the target system itself dictated a change.

Concerning the last mentioned factor, reports continued to show that Japans industry depended on the combined production of thousands of small subcontractors and work­shops manufacturing essential component parts, each em­ploying only a few people. This type of industry was meshed into the urban areas of Japan, and was extremely vulnerable to widespread incendiary destruction. Since the urban industrial areas were highly congested and in­flammable, their destruction would critically dislocate the labor force.

.

An important change in tactics involved the decision to attack individually rather than in formation. Another significant change was the decision to carry no ammuni­tion in this first great raid. It was believed that one of the greater dangers on a night mission by individual air­craft might be self-inflicted damage. It was found that there were only four night-fighter units in the Japanese Air Force, and only two of these were stationed in the home islands. As a result, on the Tokyo attack of March 9 not a single round of ammunition was carried in the B-29s. In succeeding missions, the amount of ammunition varied, since the Japanese would have soon learned that none was aboard and pressed their attacks.

Each B-29 could carry forty E-46 bomb clusters. Each cluster, exploding at 2,500 feet, would release thirty-eight M-69 incendiary bombs which would fall in a random pattern. The resulting pattern from one aircraft with an intervalometer setting, or spaced bomb fall, of fifty feet would cover .025 square miles. With a full bomb load of 17,000 pounds, the area burned by a single air­craft could be approximately sixteen acres.

In this memorable ten-day period, beginning on March 9, the Command’s three wings sent 1,595 B-29 sorties against the four major cities, unleashing 9,365 tons of incendiaries from an average altitude of 7,000 feet. Thirty-two square miles of highly populated and industrialized area were destroyed. In the devastating raid upon Tokyo on March 9, 15.8 square miles were burned, with the loss of only one B-29 to enemy action.

The phenomenal success of the new tactics restored the morale and fighting spirit of the Command’s crews by providing a degree of battle success proportionate to the effort expended. Especially important, the B-29 was estab­lished as a reliable and efficient combat aircraft.

After the March raids Japanese opposition steadily de­clined. It became the exception when B-29s met heavy opposition over the target. Flak and searchlight defenses continued to be strong in the Tokyo area but were com­paratively weak elsewhere.

Under the brilliant leadership of General LeMay, to­gether with Brig. Gens. Roger Ramey, Emmett O’Donnell, John H. Davies, Thomas Power, and Frank Armstrong, his wing commanders, the XXI Bomber Command, by March 1945, was inflicting heavy and continuous devasta­tion upon the home islands.

Incendiary Operations

Sixty-one percent, or 96,480 tons, of all bombs dropped by the B-29s upon Japan were incendiaries. The scope and complexity of these attacks were the most impressive in the history of aerial warfare. Seventy-nine major mis­sions hit sixty-four principal cities, involving 13,365 air­craft sorties and causing nearly one hundred percent building damage in a total area of approximately 175 square miles, practically all in the very center of the cities.

General LeMay said later: “Due to the nature of Japa­nese construction, the vast majority of targets were highly inflammable and ideal for incendiary attacks. It was a classic situation, one that airpower exponents since the days of Douhet had looked for as a stage to prove their concepts.”

The most devastating single raid was the March 9 at­tack upon Tokyo. There were six strategic targets within the primary area, the most important being the Hattori Company, which manufactured fuzes for artillery shells. Each major factory was surrounded by a 100-foot fire­break. Home industry was highly concentrated within this area. Most of the people living in the zone worked either at the factories or supported them in their homes. Ninety-five percent of the homes and factories in the area were made of wood.

XXI Bomber Command Field Order No. 43 directed the 73d, 313th, and 314th Wings to participate. All crews were to snake individual runs on the target at night at altitudes ranging from 5,000 to 7,800 feet.

Three hundred and twenty-five B-29s took off from the Marianas, and 279 dropped 1,665 tons of bombs onto the primary zone. Fourteen aircraft were lost to all causes, and 102 crew casualties were recorded-3.1 percent of those airborne. Visual bombing was accomplished by 125 crews, radar bombing by 149, and five crews bombed on the lead aircraft. This was also the first combat mission for the 314th Wing.

Bombing results were considered superior. Japanese air opposition was weak, with seventy-four fighters making only forty attacks. Flak was accurate and intense but diminished as the attack progressed. Japan’s defenses were proven to be extremely weak.

A fifty-mph wind, plus the highly combustible nature of the city, resulted in a fire that was out of control within thirty minutes after the first B-29s dropped their bombs. Police records showed that 267,000 buildings were destroyed, about one-quarter of Tokyo.

The fires were still burning by mid-morning, and had it not been for the river, which made a natural firebreak, they might have continued much longer. Aerial photo­graphs showed a burned-out area of 15.8 square miles. Eighteen percent of the industrial area and sixty-three percent of the commercial area were destroyed. Command intelligence officers deleted twenty-two numbered indus­trial targets from their priority lists.

The ten-day fire blitz of March was a turning point. The morale of the Japanese people began a steady decline, never to rise again. Industries suddenly ceased to exist, or operated at greatly reduced rates. The panic-stricken people began an exodus from the major cities. The rate of absen­teeism in the war industries recorded an alarming rise. The population of Tokyo dropped from over five million on January 1, 1945, to two and one-third million on August 1.

In Tokyo, only four incendiary raids completely de­stroyed 51.3 square miles of industrial urban areas. Kobe, a city comparable to St. Louis, lost fifty-one percent of its industrial area in only three raids. Osaka, industrially similar to Pittsburgh, was Japan’s second city in population, and second to Tokyo as an industrial and transportation center. In three incendiary attacks, one-fourth of its area was destroyed. Nagoya, a city of a million and a half, produced half of Japan’s aircraft and engines, plus machine tools, ball bearings, and tanks. Incendiary attacks destroyed one-third of its industrial urban area.

Practically all incendiary bombs in the Marianas were expended in the ten-day blitz. Consequently, there were no incendiary missions from March 19 to April 13. Then three incendiary strikes occurred, again followed by a pause in fire raids until May 14, due primarily to the Command’s strikes against Japanese airfields in support of the Okinawa invasion. On May 14, 529 bombers were airborne in the first daylight incendiary raid, the first strike in which all four wings struck the same target, the north urban area of Nagoya. This was the largest force sent against Japan to date.

The fourth bomb wing to join the Command was the 58th. It flew its first mission from West Field, Tinian, on May 5, 1945. Although a latecomer to the Marianas, the 58th was no neophyte. It had been the combat element of the XX Bomber Command, which had been hastily sent to India by General Arnold in 1944. Staging from bases in China, it flew its first mission against Bangkok on June 5 of that year. Its final mission from China was flown on March 30, 1945, against Singapore.

June 1945 saw the tempo of the fire raids stepped up. The Command released a total of 20,559 tons of incen­diaries in fifteen missions, numbering 3,203 sorties. Principal targets were Tokyo, Osaka, Kobe, Sasebo, and Fukuoka, but as the destruction of these major centers became more complete the Command turned toward secondary targets. When 444 B-29s attacked Osaka on the fifteenth, not one Japanese fighter rose to the attack and the Japanese never again sent up a fighter defense of any consequence.

July was the last full month in the war, and on July 16 the XXI Bomber Command was redesignated the Twen­tieth Air Force under Lt. Gen. Nathan F. Twining.

It was evident to most of our air generals that the war was rapidly coming to an end. General Twining has said:

“Upon my arrival in Guam to assume command of the Twentieth Air Force on July 2, 1945, 1 spent considerable time studying the photographs of the B-29 bomber offen­sive against the Japanese islands—particularly their war-sustaining resources, industry and oil. It was readily ap­parent from the bomb damage photos, and we had many of them, that the Japanese resources for continuing a war were practically nil. This information was known to General Arnold in Washington, who presented it to our top deci­sion-making people. But in spite of this the decision was made to continue on with the plans for the invasion of Japan.” [Italics added]

Precision Bombing Operations

From the beginning of March to the end of the war, a little more than twenty percent of the Command’s combat effort was devoted to high-explosive bombing of priority industrial targets, usually by daylight formation attacks. Targets included installations of the aircraft industry, arsenals, oil, chemical plants, and in the latter months of the war, with the land invasion in mind, transportation facilities.

In precision bombing, weather was the dominant factor. When conditions permitted visual sighting, the results were usually satisfactory. The weather over Japan was usually not favorable for visual daylight attacks, however, and there were attempts to employ precision bombing at night, using flares. Results were discouraging. The light from the flares was reflected by either the clouds or smoke and hindered rather than helped the bombardiers. The Command decided to draw on the techniques used by the Royal Air Force and await arrival of RAF 1,000-pound, target-identification bombs. Reflex optic bomb­sights, better for this type of bombing, were ordered.

By May, the Command was achieving acceptable results. Crews were gaining in experience. The weather improved. Flying at low altitudes eliminated winddrift problems. This combination resulted, for the first time, in more than fifty percent damage to precision targets.

Mission No. 232, flown on the night of June 26, was the first combat mission for the 315th Bomb Wing, the fifth and the last wing to join the Command. Its B-29s carried a new radar—the APQ-7—designed specifically for radar bombing, and were unarmed, except for tail guns, permitting a much larger bomb load. The 315th was given the task of destroying Japan’s oil industry since many of the large refineries were on the coast and easily identified by radar. Fifteen missions were flown against this complex. Using radar for ninety-five percent of their bombing, the wing destroyed most of the major oil refineries and more than six million barrels of storage-tank capacity. The total cost was three aircraft lost and thirty casualties.

Japanese opposition became so insignificant by late July that General LeMay announced in advance to the Japa­nese which targets would be hit and warned the people to evacuate. On July 27, more than 60,000 pamphlets were dropped on eleven cities. Japanese officials later admitted that these pamphlets frightened thousands from their jobs and homes.

Tactical Operations and Mine-laying

Another requirement imposed upon the XXI Bomber Command was the tactical operations against airfields on the southern Japanese home island. These attacks, con­ducted from April 17 to May 11, 1945, were deemed necessary to protect our naval forces off Okinawa.

The B-29s flew ninety-five tactical missions, dropping 8,116 tons of fragmentation and general-purpose bombs. Twenty-three B-29s were lost. More than 350 Japanese aircraft were destroyed or damaged on the airfields and 208 in the air.

The mine-laying operation was going on at the same time. General Twining has called it a most essential ele­ment in the air offensive. He further stated that it demon­strated for the first time that airpower could carry the brunt of a strategic blockade of a powerful maritime nation. Fleet Admiral Chester Nimitz said the mining campaign accomplished phenomenal results. Never before had such an operation been undertaken on such a scale and with so bold an aim.

The aerial mining campaign hit at Japanese dependence on imports to supply her factories and feed her people. In the last five months of the war, more than 1,250,000 tons of shipping were sunk or damaged by B-29-sown mines —more than by any other agent, including submarines. Yet the mining campaign represented less than six percent of the total sorties flown during the last five months of the war and involved only one wing, the 313th.

Cooperation between the Bomber Command and the Navy was excellent. The Navy designed, supplied, and serviced the mines. The final results are a tribute to both Services.

Prince Konoye evaluated the B-29 mining campaign as having had an over-all economic effect comparable to the bombing and incendiary attacks. Captain Tamura of the Japanese Navy said in an interview after the war that the B-29 mining was so effective that he believed the war could have been shortened had the operation begun earlier.

Effects on Japanese Morale

Once the B-29 raids began, and as they increased in size and frequency, Japanese propagandists found it im­possible to hide the true state of affairs from the people.

A committee which studied Japanese morale states:

The air raids brought the war home to the Japa­nese people, psychologically as well as physically, and made them realize as nothing else could that the mere factor of geographic remoteness does not ensure a nation against the terrible consequences of modern air warfare.”

To this, a city official in Sakai added: “As raids in­creased, the fighting spirit decreased because people were tired and frightened. Also, the desire for peace increased and work capacity was lowered.”

The conviction spread that continued resistance was futile. In particular, the extension of the bombing to the secondary cities convinced the people that the B-29s could, and would, destroy every city in Japan. Also, they were made painfully aware of the impotence of their own government to prevent destruction or even to minimize its effects.

An important secondary result was the widespread and disruptive evacuation from the cities. City dwellers dis­persed throughout the nation and spread the word of Japan’s weakness by their words and by their actions. The mass exodus began after the incendiary attacks on Tokyo in March, when approximately two million people lost their homes. More than 8,500,000 persons fled from the cities. Fully one-third of these evacuees had been engaged in war production.

Another aspect of B-29 operations which affected morale was the dropping of leaflets to announce future raids. The manager of a large factory in Nagaoka said: “The leaflets had a great effect on the morale of the people. They figured that if the enemy could announce a raid beforehand, the enemy was superior.”

The Atomic Bombs

The B-29 Enola Gay, with Col. Paul Tibbets as air­craft commander, appeared over Hiroshima at 8:15 on the morning of August 6. Its single bomb took forty-seven seconds to descend prior to its violent explosion. An area of 4.4 square miles was completely obliterated—sixty-nine percent of the urban area. The same destruction would have required 210 B.29s, each carrying ten tons of con­ventional bombs.

Nagasaki, the second city to fall victim, had experi­enced only five small raids in the preceding twelve months. The impact of the A-bomb here was less shattering than at Hiroshima. The scale of destruction was greater, but the actual area destroyed was smaller due to the terrain, and the point of fall of the bomb.

The two A-bombs were dropped from B-29s of the 509th Composite Group, which had trained at Wendover Field, Utah, and was based at North Field, Tinian, on May 1, 1945.

Whether or not these two weapons were the decisive factor in causing the surrender within the week is a moot point. General Twining said; “I am convinced that the surrender would have occurred within a short time period even if the atomic bomb had never been used.” General LeMay agrees with this view. He stated: “The atomic bomb certainly expedited the collapse; however, … I think it was anticlimactic in that the verdict was already rendered.”

The fact remains that the atomic bombs were a facet of airpower. Whether the atomic bombs or the massive raids prior to August 6 had forced Japan to seek peace, it was the B.29 offensive which finally brought about the decision.

An Evaluation

The impact of the B-29 attacks upon the Japanese urban social structure was calamitous. Those cities spared from direct attack shared the experience of millions of refugees who fled into the country seeking food and shelter. The, raids brought a fundamental realization that there was no defense against the B-29, and, worse, that nothing could prevent the destruction of every inhabited area of Japan.

As the B-29 attacks increased in number and intensity, the people grew progressively more short-tempered and outspoken in their criticism of the government, the war, and affairs in general.

No nation can long sustain an aggressive war effort without the full cooperation and determined will to win on the part of the people. These elements were lacking in Japan in the summer of 1945, and airpower was the prin­cipal cause for this apathy. The Japanese said of the B-29 that:

• It was the most important single factor in causing them to have doubts of victory.

• It was the most important single factor in causing them to feel certain of defeat.

• It was the most important single factor in making them unwilling to continue the war.

• It was the greatest single cause of worry during the war.

A look at the final results achieved by the Twentieth Air Force to August 14, 1945, shows that:

• One hundred eighty square miles of highly indus­trialized urban areas were burned to the ground. The industrial productive capacity of sixty-one cities was destroyed, and twenty-one million Japanese people were displaced.

• Six hundred and two major war factories were de­stroyed or severely damaged, excluding the thousands of small feeder factories destroyed.

• A total of 159,862 tons of bombs were dropped on Japanese targets, including a daily average of 1,193 tons during the final three months.

• One and one-quarter million tons of Japanese ship­ping were destroyed by aerial mines.

• A total of 33,047 bomber sorties were flown against Japan.

• Some 470,000 barrels of oil and oil products, 221,000 tons of foodstuffs, and two billion square yards of textiles were destroyed.

• In twenty Japanese cities, 100 percent of the planned target area was totally destroyed, seventy-five to 100 per­cent of the planned area in eighteen cities, and from fifty to seventy-five percent in thirteen cities.

• Based on figures before the attacks, production in key industries had decreased by the following:

Oil refineries 83 percent

Aircraft engine plants75 percent

Airframe plants 60 percent

Electronics and communications equipment plants 70 percent

Army ordnance plants30 percent

Light metals 35 percent

Credit must also go to the B-29 gunners, who destroyed 714 Japanese aircraft, probably destroyed 456, and dam­aged 770.

The campaign was not without its price. From the be­ginning of combat operations on November 24, 1944, to August 14, 1945, the Twentieth Air Force operating from the Marianas lost 447 B-29s and 824 crews. Of these, 343 aircraft, or 1.2 percent of those airborne, and 243 crews, or 0.8 percent of those airborne, were lost in com­bat missions. During the entire period, eleven percent of the aircraft over the target were lost or damaged. Japanese fighters accounted for thirteen percent of all battle damage, seventy-six percent was due to flak, nine percent was charged to both, and two percent was self-inflicted.

In addition to these combat operations, the Bomber Command also flew 480 photo reconnaissance sorties, 755 weather reconnaissance and leaflet-dropping missions, 248 radarscope missions, and 134 search sorties for missing crews.

As the war entered the first week of August 1945 and Japan lay battered and charred from southern Kyushu to northern Honshu, preparations were still being made in Washington and in the Far East for an amphibious invasion. The advice of our top air commanders was often ignored, for they were convinced that Japan would sur­render prior to November 1. Actually, the true capability of the B-29 was never fully recognized, except by the air officers, and was not given adequate weight in the plans established for the war against Japan. The B-29 campaign was conceived, in effect, as a means to an end, namely invasion, rather than as a decisive force within itself. Few officers outside the AAF believed otherwise.

Ten weeks remained from the time the Japanese did surrender until the scheduled date of the Kyushu invasion. Consider the state of social and economic collapse existing in Japan at the time of surrender, and associate this with the size of the B-29 operations to that date. The Twentieth Air Force was in a position, by August of 194.5, to deliver a bomb tonnage upon Japan in the next eleven weeks equal to its entire effort to that time, even if additional atomic bombs were not used.

The United States owes much to Generals Twining and LeMay for their superb performances. General LeMay must be given special recognition. It was he who assumed command of the XXI at a time when its performance was poor and its achievements were negligible. It was due in large measure to his leadership, discipline, and brilliant strategy that the Command became the most formidable force of destruction that the world had ever seen.

The United States likewise owes much to the officers and men of the XXI Bomber Command and the Twentieth Air Force. Two and one-half million combat-equipped troops and 9,000 kamikaze planes were ready to meet our invading armies on the beaches of Kyushu and Honshu.

There is little to add to the final address by their com­mander, General Twining, who said after the final mission had been flown on August 14, 1945:

“That day marked the closing of a record of achieve­ment that is unparalleled in the history of the Army Air Forces. That the Twentieth Air Force was able to under­take and so decisively accomplish its mission within a very short span of time is a tribute to those who designed and produced its weapons, to the courageous airmen who by their ingenuity and training established the combat effec­tiveness of those new weapons, and to the ground per­sonnel who were unstinting in their efforts to support the combat force.”

The author, Maj. James M. Boyle, is an Assistant Professor of History at the Air Force Academy. Born in Fresno, Calif., in 1925, he was trained as a pilot during World War II. He received his B.S. degree in history from the University of Santa Clara. Calif., in 1950, his master’s the following year from Stanford Univer­sity, Calif., and his Ph.D. in history from St. Louis University, Mo., in 1963. This article is condensed from his 260-page doctorate dissertation, “The XXI Bomber Command: A Pri­mary Factor in the Defeat of Japan.” Major Boyle is presently teaching a course in the history, theory, and employment of airpower during his second tour at the Academy. Earlier, before two years of graduate work at St. Louis University, he was assigned to the Air Force Academy as an instructor during the 1960-61 academic year.

THE MOSCOW BATTLE OF 1941–1942 ENDED
20 April 1942
«When I am asked what I remember the best about the war I always reply:

the battle of Moscow. It ruined the ‘Barbarossa’ plan”.

Marshal G. K. Zhukov

In the beginning of 1941 the Nazi commandment started to prepare for the offensive of Moscow. According to the plan large German alignments were supposed to encircle the main forces of the Red Army which defended the capital and defeat them near the towns of Bryansk and Vyasma. Then they had to quickly round Moscow from north and south.

September 30, 1941 began Moscow strategic defensive operation.

Owing to bloody battles and stubborn resistance of the Soviet forces the German offensive of November 1941 was stopped. On December 5-6, 1941 when it became clear that the enemy had exhausted himself, the Soviet armies launched a counter-offensive.

During the battles of Kalinin, Klinsko-Solnechnogorsk, Tula, Kaluga and Elets the Soviet forces took the lead from the beginning.

On December 8 Hitler signed the instruction to start the defensive operation at the entire Soviet-German front including the Moscow sector.

In the beginning of January 1942 the counter-offensive of the Soviet forces at the western sector was completed. The General Headquarters decided to pass to the general offensive at all the main lines of advance: north-western line, western and south line in order to defeat the main enemy alignments.

During Rzhevsk-Vyasma operation which took place in the period of January 8 – April 20, 1942 and was meant to complete the defeat of the ‘Center’ German armies group the enemy was thrown back for 100 – 250 kilometers from Moscow. Completely liberated were Moscow, Tula and Ryazan regions, many parts of Kalinin, Smolensk and Orel regions. Due to the insufficient experience of conducting the offensive operation of a large scale and the shortage of forces and means, especially mobile forces, the task of encirclement and defeat of the ‘Center’ armies group was not accomplished in full. However in spite of incompletion the general offensive on the western line of advance proved successful.

On April 20, 1942 the High Command of the USSR decided that the west sector forces should begin the defensive operation at the line of Rzhev, Gzhatsk, Kirov and Zhizdra.

The battle of Moscow was the first significant defeat of the German army during the World War II. The enemy lost over 400 thousand men, 1.3 thousand tanks, 2.5 thousand guns, over 15 thousand machines and other equipment. It was also a psychological turning point for the soldiers and civil population: the faith in victory increased, the myth of the German army invincibility was debunked. The failure of the blitzkrieg plan spread doubts of the successful outcome of the war among the military and political German leaders as well as the ordinary Germans.

For the model accomplishment of military tasks and the demonstrated courage about 40 units and formations were conferred the rank of Guards, 36 thousand of the Soviet service men were awarded with orders and medals, 110 men were conferred the title of the Hero of the Soviet Union. In 1944 the Supreme Soviet of the USSR instituted the medal ‘For the defense of Moscow’. It was awarded to over 1 million defenders of the city.

Blitzkrieg Definition
Blitzkrieg—which means “lightning war” in German—had its roots in earlier military strategy, including the influential work of the 19th-century Prussian general Carl von Clausewitz. Clausewitz proposed the “concentration principle,” the idea that concentrating forces against an enemy, and making a single blow against a carefully chosen target (the Schwerpunkt, or “center of gravity”) was more effective than dispersing those forces.

In the wake of their defeat in World War I, German military leaders determined that a lack of mobile, maneuverable forces and flexible tactics had led that conflict to bog down in the deadly attrition of trench warfare.

As a result, while France focused its efforts between the wars on building up its defensive border, known as the Maginot Line, the Germans decided to prepare for a shorter conflict won through military maneuvers, rather than in the trenches.

This focus on mobile warfare was partly a response to Germany’s relatively limited military resources and manpower, following the strictures imposed on it by the Treaty of Versailles. After Adolf Hitler came to power in 1933 and made clear his intention to rearm the nation, he encouraged younger commanders like Heinz Guderian, who argued for the importance of both tanks and aircraft in this mobile approach to warfare.

Play Video
Battle of Britain

WATCH VIDEO: The Battle of Britain 

Uses in World War II
German forces employed some tactics associated with blitzkrieg in the Spanish Civil War in 1936 and the invasion of Poland in 1939, including combined air-ground attacks and the use of Panzer tank divisions to quickly crush the poorly equipped Polish troops. Then in April 1940, Germany invaded neutral Norway, seizing the capital, Oslo, and the country’s main ports with a series of surprise attacks.

In May 1940 came Germany’s invasion of Belgium, the Netherlands and France, during which the the Wehrmacht (German army) used the combined force of tanks, mobile infantry and artillery troops to drive through the Ardennes Forest and quickly penetrated the Allied defenses.

With close air support from the Luftwaffe (German air force) and the benefit of radio communications to aid in coordinating strategy, the Germans blazed through northern France and toward the English Channel, bombing London and other cities while pushing the British Expeditionary Force into a pocket around Dunkirk. By the end of June, the French army had collapsed, and the nation sued for peace with Germany.

In 1941, German forces again employed blitzkrieg tactics in their invasion of the Soviet Union, expecting a short campaign like the one they had enjoyed in Western Europe the previous spring. But the strategy proved less successful against the highly organized and well-armed Soviet defenses, and by 1943 Germany had been forced into a defensive war on all fronts.

Was Blitzkrieg Truly a New Form of Warfare?
In the stunned aftermath of France’s fall, both Nazi propaganda and Western media attributed Germany’s success to the revolutionary new form of warfare known as blitzkrieg. But in reality, though the word “blitzkrieg” had been used in German military writings before World War II to describe a short conflict, as opposed to a drawn-out war of attrition, it was never officially adopted as a military doctrine.

Rather than a completely new form of warfare, the strategy Germany followed in May and June 1940 had much in common with the strategy it employed at the outset of World War I, when strategists like Alfred von Schlieffen determined Germany should aim to defeat its enemies quickly and decisively, as it was ill-suited to win a long and drawn-out conflict against larger, better-prepared forces.

But unlike in 1914-18, German forces fighting in 1939-40 had the benefit of new military technology developed or improved in the 1920s and 1930s, including tanks, motor vehicles, aircraft and radios. These new tools, combined with an emphasis on speed, mobility, focused attacks and encirclements, enabled the Wehrmacht to turn traditional military tactics into a devastatingly modern brand of warfare.

German commander Erwin Rommel, who led a Panzer division during the invasion of France, later employed blitzkrieg tactics against British forces in the deserts of North Africa in 1941-42.

After blitzkrieg failed in the Soviet invasion, however, Hitler and German military leaders distanced themselves from the concept, claiming it was an invention of their enemies; Hitler himself denied he had ever used the word.

Later Uses of Blitzkrieg
The Allies adapted blitzkrieg to their own advantage by the end of World War II, including in the Battle of Stalingrad and the European operations commanded by U.S. General George Patton in 1944. Patton had carefully studied the German campaigns against Poland and France and also favored quick, decisive action as a way to avoid more costly, drawn-out conflicts.

Though Germany’s quick victories in 1939 and 1940 remain the most famous examples of blitzkrieg, military historians have pointed to later blitzkrieg-inspired operations, including the combined air and ground attacks by Israel against Arab forces in Syria and Egypt during the Six-Day War in 1967, and the Allied invasion of Iraqi-occupied Kuwait in 1991 during the Persian Gulf War.

Introduced by the Germans in World War II, blitzkrieg is a military tactic that focuses on a single, coordinated, and intense blow against an enemy. This new and brutal breed of warfare has been used by other nations to greater or lesser effect ever since.

?

 

If at first you don’t succeed, try, try again. 

 

This might have been the mantra guiding German military strategists between the throes of World Wars I and II. Following the signing of the Treaty of Versailles in 1918, Germany reflected on its losses and sought to improve strategically in the future. Success moving forward meant prioritizing offense rather than wasting away like sitting ducks in the trenches. Germany wanted to redeem its reputation and rectify its strategy going into WWII. The implementation of blitzkrieg warfare during WWII changed how the world would experience war moving forward.

 



German Heinkel He 111 aircraft bombing Warsaw, Poland, in 1939. (Wikimedia Commons)

 

Blitzkrieg Definition
Blitzkrieg (pronounced ‘blit-skreeg’): A military tactic characterized by sudden, concentrated attacks using armored tanks, boots on the ground, and air raids to overwhelm an enemy from all angles. 

 

The German word blitzkrieg translates to “lightning war,” sparking connotations of the unforgiving power of nature at the height of a storm. Blitzkrieg relied on a full-frontal attack, ensnaring the enemy in a haze of artillery from every direction. Based on the Concentration Principle credited to the Prussian military strategist Carl von Clausewitz, blitzkrieg attacks mobilize as many resources as possible to attack a single target. The goal is to capitalize on the element of surprise while using speed to obliterate the enemy. Using this tactic, Germany secured victory after victory while suffering fewer casualties among its troops than in traditional warfare. But blitzkriegs were launched against cities and other hubs of social activity, and the Germans had little concern for civilian victims of the attacks.

 


For more on the Luftwaffe and other Nazi war tech, check out the MagellanTV series Nazi War Machines.

 

German Blitzkrieg Tactics in World War II


St. Paul’s Cathedral in London during a fire raid. (National Archives Catalog)

 

WWI was fought with defense at the forefront of each military’s strategy. Trench warfare allowed armies ample time to establish their defensive fronts, yet the tactical disadvantage of constructing trenches and the unsanitary conditions they produced left troops buried half alive. The landscape of the battlefield changed with every advance, and the cascade of artillery left the earth in ashes with bodies littered on top. When the world erupted in turmoil once again in 1939, Germany was eager to rectify its military strategy and curtail the casualties this time around. At 4:45 a.m. on September 1, 1939, the first of many blitzkriegs rained down on Poland. Hitler’s invasion of Poland took the nation by surprise as 2,000 tanks, 900 bombers and 400 fighter planes began to attack. The German Nazis emerged from sea, sky, and land, ready to wage war on all fronts.

 

Battles Where German Blitzkrieg Was Successfully Used
Germany used blitzkrieg to kick off WWII with the invasion of Poland. In the following years, Germany invaded Norway, Belgium, France, and the Netherlands employing the same tactic of surprise. When Germany intervened to aid the Italian invasion of North Africa, the unexpected brutality of the attacks pressured British and French troops into a position of constant defense. Perhaps the most notorious use of blitzkrieg was in the sustained bombing campaign known as ‘the Blitz’ that targeted British cities and towns. Attacks of this nature drew everyday people onto the frontlines of the war. WWII was a total war, calling on all aspects of society to take part in the war effort. No industry, no company, no nation, and no person could evade the reach of the blitzkrieg. 

 

Starting on September 7, 1940, London was bombed for 57 straight nights, forcing tens of thousands of people to seek shelter in the London Underground System. The London Passenger Transport Board served ‘twopenny meals’ along with tea and coffee to those who brought their own mugs. 

 

Why Was the German Blitzkrieg So Effective?


A Soviet soldier during the invasion of Poland, 1939. 

(Imperial War Museum, Second World War Press Agency Print Collection / Wikimedia Commons)

 

The ‘Lightning War’ technique restored the reputation of the Wehrmacht, the defense forces for the Third Reich. Through its brazen invasions, German military forces came back with a vengeance after their defeat in WWI. Blitzkrieg relied on surprise, speed, and ground coverage, making use of each military branch within the Wehrmacht. By calling on seamen and soldiers alike, Germany freed up enough resources to ensure that any resistance could be squashed. 

 

Blitzkriegs followed a formulaic approach: attack, penetrate, and encircle. With time on their side, the Germans swarmed like bees to a hive, deploying bombs and storming city streets. War descended on Europe, and with Germany’s revitalized strategy, early battles tended to end in their favor. The surprising and unexpected nature of the blitzkrieg left countries defenseless as their forces tried to rally in the middle of the night. 

 

Germany was First to Use Blitzkrieg in World War II


Map of Poland in 1939. (Department of History, United States Military Academy / Wikimedia Commons)

 

While elements of blitzkrieg had been used prior to the twentieth century, the advent of new technologies in aircraft, weaponry, and communication made the term blitzkrieg synonymous with WWII. Germany was the first nation to adopt this militaristic practice and used its novelty to gain a psychological edge over the Allied forces. Blitzkrieg strategies would be borrowed by the Allies after a few years, but in the early days of the war, Germany secured a tactical lead as its enemies scrambled to defend against it.

 

Combined Land & Air Forces
Though primarily focused on the strategic allocation of their own resources before attacking, blitzkrieg campaigns aimed to target the weakest point in the enemy’s defense. The Wehrmacht was broken up into the Heer (army), the Luftwaffe (air forces), and the Kriegsmarine (navy). The blitzkrieg strategy relied on all three of these branches to support one another while attacking in unexpected ways. Once the Nazis had identified a city or border that could be easily breached, the Wehrmacht would send armored tanks, mobile infantrymen, and air bombardments to enshroud the enemy in a haze of smoke before charging ahead for the final blow.

 

Utilized Radio Communications to Coordinate Attacks
In addition to the advances in airplanes and weapons, WWII saw the first use of portable radios by battalions. The immediacy of radio communication meant that those in the sky could provide information about a battle with a bird’s eye view. Troops miles away from one another could coordinate attacks and synchronize their land and air forces. The Germans were the first to use these advanced radio systems in WWII, but their widespread use by all powers in the war soon meant that communications needed to be done in code. 

 

Why Did the German Blitzkrieg Fail?


Allied planes over Holland. (The Spaarnestad Collection / Wikimedia Commons)

 

The initial advantage held by the Germans set them up well in WWII, but as the war raged on, the Allies began borrowing blitzkrieg tactics. Europe had been ablaze too long – it was time to fight fire with fire. General George Patton had been a keen student of German literature in his youth, but when he joined the United States military, he applied his interest in Germany to breaking down its actions in war. Patton encouraged a blitzkrieg mentality among the troops he led, emphasizing “short, sharp, and furious” campaigns. He commanded Allied forces to stay mobile rather than restricting themselves as had happened in the trenches. By the time Axis troops ventured into the Soviet Union in 1941, the Allies had a better idea of what to expect and the Nazis suffered more casualties than anticipated. The novelty of surprise faded after the overuse of blitzkrieg. For the rest of the war, the Axis and Allied powers alike suffered the burn of the Blitz.

 

“A good plan violently executed now is better than a perfect plan executed next week.” —General George S. Patton

 

Other Uses of Blitzkrieg & Its Impact on Today
Blitzkriegs were firecrackers that appealed to militaries for their fleeting glow and intoxicating power. They blatantly violated the conventions of war that had been multilaterally agreed upon at the Hague Conventions (1899, 1907) and at the first Geneva Convention (1929). While tactically advantageous to military operations, blitzkriegs disregarded the procedure for declaring war, condoned the blind slaughtering of civilians, and fed the idea that unethical attacks were worthwhile if they secured a big enough advantage. As more countries adopted blitzkrieg techniques in WWII, their efficacy wore down in tandem with Germany’s lead. 

 

The Iraq War
The United States’ invasion of Iraq in 2003 saw the advent of a modernized blitzkrieg campaign. The term ‘shock and awe’ flooded American news coverage and set expectations for a quick victory in Baghdad. Harlan Ullman, who coined the term ‘shock and awe campaign,’ noted that this was misportrayed in the media as a mirror of blitzkrieg tactics. He claims the campaign’s intended objective was not to target civilian centers or kill people, but rather to destroy an enemy’s sense of unity, purpose, and will to fight. 

 

The invasion of Iraq was, in important respects, guided by the so-called ‘Powell Doctrine,’ a term created by journalists. Gen. Colin Powell, who served as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during Operation Desert Storm in 1991 and Secretary of State during President George W. Bush’s first term, advocated the vigorous use of diplomacy before the application of overwhelming military force to resolve conflicts. Military operations, when deemed necessary, were to be swift, strategic, and successful. The initial attack on Iraq in 2003 borrowed some psychological elements of blitzkrieg by emphasizing the ‘shock and awe’ tactic that had been used in Operation Desert Storm, but it starkly differed from the WWII German model in its efforts to minimize collateral damage (i.e., deaths of noncombatants and destruction of civilian infrastructure).

 

Russia’s 2022 Invasion of Ukraine
Russia’s ongoing invasion of Ukraine is a striking example of the unethical, inhumane consequences of a blitzkrieg attack (albeit a militarily unsuccessful one, so far). After the former Soviet Union’s annexation of the Crimean Peninsula in 2014, Russia-supported forces have engaged in armed conflict with Ukrainian soldiers over ownership of the Donbas region. Following years of ignored ceasefires and constant cyber-attacks, Russia launched a full-scale invasion into Ukraine on February 24, 2022. 

 

What Russia continues to call a ‘special military operation’ has resulted in the deaths of more than 3,000 civilians and the displacement of seven million people. As is common in blitzkrieg attacks, the assailant, Russia, did not formally declare war and to this day has refused to do so. Russian missiles launch into schools, shopping malls, hospitals, and homes on a daily basis, tormenting the Ukrainian people from afar before the conflict arrives on their doorstep. The city streets of Mariupol, Donetsk, and Luhansk have become battlefields as Ukrainian civilian soldiers defend their homes from Russian forces on the ground. The televised reports and real-time streaming of the atrocities in Ukraine have brought the reality of a modern-day blitzkrieg to our eyes, making it both hard to watch and tragically easy to look away.

 

Want to Learn More About German War Machines? 
While blitzkrieg had been introduced with the intent to lessen the bloodshed for German offenses, its application between 1939 and 1945 made WWII the deadliest war in human history. On paper, blitzkrieg was a simple yet genius strategy. In reality, blitzkriegs manipulated the emotions of an enemy relying on fear, surprise, and disorganization to cause mass casualties among civilians and soldiers alike. What first took the Allied powers by surprise supplied them with the strategy that would ultimately secure their win. The Allies studied the enemy’s strategy to use it against them, and nations have followed suit ever since. For a glimpse into the other tools that fanned the flames of WWII, watch Nazi War Machines on MagellanTV.